{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff1\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0 Helvetica 
Neue;}}\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\sectd\titlepg
\pard\li0\ri0\fi0\f1\fs28
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 14\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  a = Porter, S.D.       , [Initials follow last na
me separated by a comma; terms like Jr., III, de, and von should be placed after
 the initials preceded by a second comma.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of temperature on colony growth and develop
mental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta}{\f1\fs28\b  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [no peri
od after title]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Insect Physiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  34(12)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Issue:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [not used; place (issue#) after vol
ume number]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1127-1133\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1988; online 1 October 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of temperature on colony growth and d
evelopmental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta}{\f1\fs28\b  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [n
o period after title]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Insect Physiology  }{\f1\fs28\b 
[full journal name is preferred]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1910(88)90215-6  }{\f1\fs28\b 
[see instructions #12: DOI's and PDF's].}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Jul 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; growth; development rate; phy
siology; temperature; degree days; nanitic brood; [words in title do not need to
 be repeated in keywords]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [include if possible]  }{\f1\fs28 
Growth rates of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, were studied across a range of
 constant temperatures.  Growth in established colonies only occurred at rather 
warm temperatures: between 24 and 36 C, with maximal growth around 32 C.  Colony
 growth ceased below 24 C even though 17 C was the theoretical minimum for brood
 development.  Total developmental time (egg to adult) for minor worker brood de
creased from 55 days at 24 C to 23 days at 35 C.  The proportion of time require
d by each developmental stage (i.e. eggs, larvae, pupae) was independent of temp
erature.  Nanitic brood developed about 35% faster than did minor worker brood, 
an important benefit for founding colonies.   Data are still fragmentary, but it
 appears that temperature-adjusted development rates of ants and other social Hy
menoptera are quite similar. }{\f1\fs28\b\i [no tabs or hard returns, please.]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database,
 verified-SDP. }{\f1\fs28\b\i [This tag shows that the citation was compared to 
the original].}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  This area is used to list where citations
 are cited from individual publications or web cites.  When the citations are ve
rified, this notation is deleted.\par }
{\f1\fs28 This area is also used for Alternate citations; citations providing ex
tensive keywords; Dissertation Abstract order numbers; citation of meetings or s
pecial publications; and other useful information.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publicatio
ns  }{\f1\fs28\b [see instructions #12: DOI's and PDF's].}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Translated Title:}{\f1\fs28  = Translated title.  Used where appropr
iate.  Also Alternate title translations are listed here.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Thesis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  a = Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchar
d) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their relationsh
ips to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) }{\f1\fs28\b\i [no period after
 title]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b University:}{\f1\fs28  Ph.D. dissert., University of Florida, Florid
a, 74 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Number of Pages:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [this field is not used i
n thesis type]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Thesis Type:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [field not used to presurve c
ompatibility with other databases]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Bl
anchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their rela
tionships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) }{\f1\fs28\b\i [no period
 after title]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b If available [see instructions #12: DOI
's and PDF's]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; Mississippi; scient
ific; symbiont; biocontrol; [words in title do not need to be repeated in keywor
ds]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b\i [include if possible]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b If available [see instructions #12: DOI
's and PDF's]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40562\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Forys, E.A., Rice, K.G. and Wojcik, 
D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatching se
a turtles?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 115, In: D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceeding
s of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gainesvi
lle, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatch
ing sea turtles?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; invasive species; ecological invasion
; bites; stings; Chelonia mydas; sea turtles; young animals; mortality; hatching
; Pseudomys nelsoni; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) hav
e been observed foraging in Loggerhead (Caretta caretta) & Green Turtle (Cheloni
a mydas) nests in Florida. Solenopsis invicta are attracted to mucous and moistu
re, and may establish foraging tunnels into sea turtle nests shortly after egg-l
aying, making pipping turtles vulnerable to predation. To test the potential imp
act of S. invicta on pipping sea turtles, we conducted experiments on a surrogat
e species (Pseudomys nelsoni). Over 70% of the viable hatchlings were killed by 
S. invicta during pipping or shortly after hatching. Beach surveys indicate that
 S. invicta are abundant on beaches and dunes throughout Florida.   (This articl
e was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and 
is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Allen_et_al-1997(M-3292).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or in this 
8.2 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Conference_Pr
oceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36911\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Forys, E.A., Rice, K.G. and Wojcik, 
D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998(1997)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatching se
a turtles?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  S. P. Epperly and J. Braun, compilers. Procee
dings of the 17th Annual Sea Turtle Symposium, 4-8 March 1997, Orlando, Florida,
 U.S.A., U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-SEFSC-415\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  120\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Are red imported fire ants a threat to hatch
ing sea turtles?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, July 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-17, June 09; IN: 1998(1997) Proc, 17th Annual 
Sea Turtle Symposium\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife
; sea turtles; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) hav
e been observed foraging in loggerhead (Caretta caretta) and green turtle (Chelo
nia mydas) nests in Florida.  Solenopsis invicta are attracted to mucous and moi
sture, and may establish foraging tunnels into sea turtle nests shortly after eg
g-laying, making pipping turtles vulnerable to predation.  To test the potential
 impact of S. invicta on pipping sea turtles, we conducted experiments on a surr
ogate species (Pseudomys nelsoni).  Over 70% of the viable hatchlings were kille
d by S. invicta during pipping or shortly after hatching.  Initial beach surveys
 indicate that S. invicta are abundant on beaches and dunes throughout Florida. 
  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offic
ial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this volume 3.23 MB http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/p
dfs/species/turtlesymposium1997.pdf   or   http://www.seaturtle.org/ists/docs/17
turtle.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 406\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Forys, E.A., Rice, K.G. and Wojcik, 
D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) on 
hatching turtles and prevalence of fire ants on sea turtle nesting beaches in Fl
orida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  84(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  250-253\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicida
e) on hatching turtles and prevalence of fire ants on sea turtle nesting beaches
 in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28    doi:10.2307/3496175 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-13, Dec 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; Emydidae; turtles
; nest; invasion; predation; hatching; hatch; infestation; distribution; breedin
g places; beaches; Caretta caretta; Chelonia mydas; endangered species; invasive
 species; Pseudcmys nelsoni; turtle nests; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta Bure
n) have increasingly been observed in logger-head (Caretta caretta L.) and green
 (Chelonia mydas L.) sea turtle nests in Florida, and in the nests of freshwater
 turtles. They may be attracted to the disturbance, mucous and moisture associat
ed with turtle nesting and establish foraging tunnels into turtle nests shortly 
after egglaying, thus increasing the vulnerability of hatchlings to fire ant pre
dation. We conducted experiments on a freshwater turtle (Pseudemys nelsoni Carr)
 to determine the potential impacts of S. invicta on turtle hatchlings. Over 70%
 of hatchlings were killed by S. invicta during piping or shortly after hatching
. To determine the extent of S. invicta infestation of sea turtle nesting beache
s, we sampled known nesting beaches throughout the state of Florida. Beach surve
ys indicated that S. invicta are present and often abundant on most beaches and 
dunes along the Florida coast.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. 
Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, \par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1024&context=ncfwrustaff   or   http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewco
ntent.cgi?article=1053&context=ncfwrustaff   or   https://pdfs.semanticscholar.o
rg/372b/78b9e89a9ddf4b6539299c7b7398e987acc7.pdf?_gl=1*kwaryj*_ga*MTc2NjA3MzA5Ny
4xNjgzOTQ1Mzc2*_ga_H7P4ZT52H5*MTY4NTM4NTY2NS4zMC4wLjE2ODUzODYyOTIuNjAuMC4w   or 
pdf available through  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265997540_Effect
s_of_Fire_Ants_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_on_Hatching_Turtles_and_Prevalence_of_Fire
_Ants_on_Sea_Turtle_Nesting_Beaches_in_Florida \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32711\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Pearlstine, L.G. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Gap Analysis for ant species\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Gap Anal. Bull.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  7\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  10-14\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Gap Analysis for ant species\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Gap Analysis Bulletin\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Sep 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Conomyrma flavopectus; Cremato
gaster vermiculata; Leptogenys manni; Leptothorax allardycei; Odontomachus claru
s; Paratrechina phantasma; Paratrechina wojciki; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis
 invicta; Xenomyrmex floridanus; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerin
ae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; biodiversity; h
abitat; Gap Analysis Program; spatial analysis; species richness; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  7.4 MB http://www.gap.uidaho.edu/Bulletins/7/GAAS.ht
m   or   http://www.gap.uidaho.edu/bulletins/7/Bulletin7.pdf   or 7.2 MB http://
pubs.usgs.gov/gap/07/report.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32710\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Pearlstine, L.G., Wojcik, D.P. and K
itchens, W.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The spatial distribution of diversity between disp
arate taxa: Spatial correspondence between mammals and ants across South Florida
, USA\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Landscape Ecol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  16(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  453-464\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The spatial distribution of diversity betwee
n disparate taxa: Spatial correspondence between mammals and ants across South F
lorida, USA\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Landscape Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1023/A:1017998124698\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, May 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; North America; USA; Florida; s
cientific; impact; ecological; biodiversity; Gap Analysis Program; scale; spatia
l analysis; spatial correspondence; species richness; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Gap Analysis takes a proactive landscape-level 
approach to conserving native species by identifying nodes of high biological di
versity. It uses vertebrate species richness as an index of overall biological d
iversity. However, it remains unknown whether or not the spatial distribution of
 vertebrate diversity corresponds with the diversity of other taxa. We tested wh
ether landscape-level diversity patterns corresponded between a vertebrate and a
n invertebrate taxon, mammals and ants, across the southern half of the Florida 
peninsula, USA. Composite digital maps with a 30-m spatial resolution were produ
ced for each taxon. Spatial correspondence between the taxa was determined by no
rmalizing and then subtracting the composite maps. There were large areas of spa
tial correspondence -- indicating that richness between mammals and ants was sim
ilar over much of southern Florida. However, spatial correspondence occurred whe
re the richness of both taxa was low or moderate, and areas with the highest spe
cies richness (highest 20%) for each taxon, the explicit focus of Gap Analyses, 
corresponded over only 8752 ha. Gap Analysis provides a much needed assessment o
f landscape-level diversity patterns and proactive reserve design, but it must b
e explicit that the results are applicable for vertebrate diversity, which does 
not necessarily correspond with diversity patterns of other taxa. The two taxa i
nvestigated differ by orders of magnitude in the scale that they perceive their 
environment, and it is likely that diversity hotspots vary as the scale of inves
tigation - and the taxa mapped - vary.   (This article was written and prepared 
by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public 
domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1017
998124698.pdf   or   http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1
028&context=ncfwrustaff   or html  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1
017998124698 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 402\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Allen, C.R., Rice, K.G., Wojcik, D.P. and Perciva
l, H.F.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effect of red imported fire ant envenomization on 
neonatal American alligators\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Herpetol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  31(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  318-321\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effect of red imported fire ant envenomizati
on on neonatal American alligators\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Herpetology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; venom; impact; ecological; wildlife; 
reptile; Alligator mississippiensis; American alligator; body mass; growth rate;
 body weight; sting; nonlethal effect; exotic species; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  An increasing body of evidence implicates the r
ed imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) in the decline of some vertebrate popu
lations. However, few studies have documented the modes of impact. We tested the
 effects of stinging by S. invicta on the body mass of hatchling American alliga
tors and the vulnerability of alligator eggs to S. invicta predation prior to ha
tching. Alligator eggs were brached and contents utilized as a food source by S.
 invicta only if irregularities existed on the egg surface. Pipping alligators i
n a semi-natural laboratory setting were stung heavily by S. invicta. Direct mor
tality was low, however, the body mass of stung individuals was lower than that 
of control individuals. Differences in body mass remained at 3 weeks post-tratme
nt. This effect may lead to decreased survival of impacted juvenile alligators. 
  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offic
ial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 98; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615101
5/publications/Allen_et_al-1997(M-3288).pdf   or   http://digitalcommons.unl.edu
/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1049&context=ncfwrustaff \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 45737\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Almany, G.R., De Arruda, M.P., Arthofer, W., Atal
lah, Z.K., Beissinger, S.R., Berumen, M.L., Bogdanowicz, S.M., Brown, S.D., Bruf
ord, M.W., Burdine, C., Busch, J.W., Campbell, N.R., Carey, D., Carstens, B.C., 
Chu, K.H., Cubeta, M.A., Cuda, J.P., Cui, Z., Datnoff, L.E., D\u225?vila, J.A., 
Davis, E.S., Davis, R.M., Diekmann, O.E., Eizirik, E., Fargallo, J.A., Fernandes
, F., Fukuda, H., Gale, L.R., Gallagher, E., Gao, Y., Girard, P., Godhe, A., Gon
\u231?alves, E.C., Gouveia, L., Grajczyk, A.M., Grose, M.J., Gu, Z., Halld\u233?
n, C., H\u228?rnstr\u246?m, K.A., Hemmingsen, A.H., Holmes, G.D., Huang, C.H., H
uang, C.C., Hudman, S.P., Jones, G.P., Kanetis, L., Karunasagar, I., Karunasagar
, I., Keyghobadi, N., Klosterman, S.J., Klug, P.E., Koch, J., Koopman, M.M., K\u246
?ppler, K., Koshimizu, E., Krumb\u246?ck, S., Kubisiak, T., Landis, J.B., Lasta,
 M.L., Lee, C.Y., Li, Q., Li, S.H., Lin, R.C., Liu, M., Liu, Na, Liu, W.C., Liu,
 Y., Loiseau, A., Luan, W., Maruthachalam, K.K., Mccormick, H.M., Mellick, R., M
onnahan, P.J., Morielle-Versute, E., Murray, T.E., Narum, S.R., Neufeld, K., deN
ova, P.J.G., Ojiambo, P.S., Okamoto, N., Othman, A.S., Overholt, W.A., Pardini, 
R., Paterson, I.G., Patty, O.A., Paxton, R.J., Planes, S., Porter, C., Pratchett
, M.S., P\u252?ttker, T., Rasic, G., Rasool, B., Rey, O., Riegler, M., Riehl, C.
, Roberts, J.M.K., Roberts, P.D., Rochel, E.H., Roe, Kevin J., Rossetto, M.O., R
uzzante, D.E., Sakamoto, T., Saravanan, V., Sarturi, C.R.S., Schmidt, A., Schnei
der, M.P.C., Schuler, H., Serb, J.M., Serr\u227?o, E.T.A., Shi, Y., Silva, A., S
in, Y.W., Sommer, S., Stauffer, C., Str\u252?ssmann, C.A., Subbarao, K.V., Syms,
 C., Tan, F., Tejedor, E.D.L., Thorrold, S.R., Trigiano, R.N., Trucco, M.I., Tsu
chiya-Jerep, M.T.N.S., Vergara, P., van deVliet, M.S., Wadl, P.A., Wang, A., Wan
g, H., Wang, R.X., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Weeks, A.R., Wei, F., Werner, W.J., Wiley
, E.O., Williams, D.A., Wilkins, R.J., Wisely, S.M., With, K.A., Wu, D., Yao, C.
T., Yau, C., Yeap, B.K., Zhai, B.P., Zhan, X., Zhang, G.Y., Zhang, S.Y., Zhao, R
. and Zhu, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Permanent genetic resources added to Molecular Eco
logy Resources Database 1 May 2009-31 July 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Mol. Ecol. Resour.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9(6)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1460-1466\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Nov. 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Permanent genetic resources added to Molecul
ar Ecology Resources Database 1 May 2009-31 July 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Molecular Ecology Resources\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-0998.2009.02759.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-41, May 15; IN: Rey 2011 PhD Systemes de repro
duction et scenarios d'invasion\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Wasmannia auropunctata; Myrmic
inae; scientific; genetics; microsatellite marker loci; Single Nucleotide Polymo
rphism sequencing primers; Molecular Ecology Resources Database; loci; sequencin
g primer pairs; allele specific primers; allele specific probes; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This article documents the addition of 512 micr
osatellite marker loci and nine pairs of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) se
quencing primers to the Molecular Ecology Resources Database. Loci were develope
d for the following species: ......... Wasmannia auropunctata....   These loci w
ere cross-tested on the following species: ........    This article also documen
ts the addition of nine sequencing primer pairs and sixteen allele specific prim
ers or probes for Oncorhynchus mykiss and Oncorhynchus tshawytscha; these primer
s and assays were cross-tested in both species.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  viewable in PhD thesis p.  158-172  http://www.supag
ro.fr/theses/extranet/11-0046_REY.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1819\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Adams, C.T., Lofgren, C.S. and Wojci
k, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Imported fire ant infestation of soybean fields in
 the southern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  73(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  503-504\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Imported fire ant infestation of soybean fie
lds in the southern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28    http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/ \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; South C
arolina; scientific; distribution; population; mound; impact; agricultural; econ
omic; soybean; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles
/Place/66151015/publications/Banks_et_al-1990(M-2255).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or   http
://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/58648/56327   or pdf available through 
 http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/issue/view/2804 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1801\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Hicks, D.M., Plumley, J.K., Jouvenaz
, D.P., Wojcik, D.P. and Lofgren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Imported fire ants: 10-5, an alternate formulation
 of mirex bait\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  69(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  465-467\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Aug. 1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Imported fire ants: 10-5, an alternate formu
lation of mirex bait\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28    https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/69.4.465 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Georgia; Florida; scientific; mating flight; population; m
ound; chemical control; reinfestation; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The formulation of mirex bait was modified so t
he soybean oil was applied to the corncob grits at 2 times; mirex was included i
n only the 2nd application. The bait (called 10-5) contained only 1/3 (0.1%) as 
much  toxicant as the standard 4x bait (0.3%). The procedure concentrated the to
xicant on or near the surface of the grits, which made the mirex more available 
to Solenopsis invicta Buren and S. richteri Forel. In 3 field tests against natu
ral infestations of S. invicta with 10-5, the control obtained was comparable to
 that obtained with the standard.   (This article was written and prepared by U.
S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domai
n.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles
/Place/66151015/publications/Banks_et_al-1976(M-1066).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or 1.3 MB
 pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/jee/article/69/4/465/2212159?lo
gin=true \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1812\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Jouvenaz, D.P., Wojcik, D.P. and Lof
gren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in Mat
o Grosso, Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  143-152\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Jan. 1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on fire ants, Solenopsis spp., 
in Mato Grosso, Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; ecology; biology; mating; flight; colony si
ze; temperature; caste; ecology; distribution; population density; mound; behavi
or; symbiont; predator; parasite; Orasema; Eucharitidae; myrmecophile; Scarabaei
dae; Histeridae; Staphylinidae; Thysanura; millipede; Diplopoda; Solenopsis (Lab
auchena); biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Mounds of the imported fire ant, Solenopsis inv
icta, observed in its native habitat in the state of Mato Grosso, Brazil, were t
ypically smaller than those observed in the southern United States.  Mound size 
varied somewhat with colony size but more so with the moisture level of the soil
.  The ants were most common in areas disturbed by human activity and were more 
abundant in areas disturbed within 1-2 years of the survey than in areas undistu
rbed for longer periods.  Most colonies observed were mature.  Arthropods encoun
tered frequently in ant nests included the parasitic wasp, Orasema sp. (Eucharit
idae), myrmecophilous beetles (Scarabaeidae, Histeridae, Staphylinidae), Thysanu
ra, and millipedes.  The socially parasitic ants, Solenopsis (Labauchena) spp., 
common in Uruguay and Argentina, appear to be rare in Mato Grosso.   (This artic
le was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and
 is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/pub
lications/Banks_et_al-1985(M-1520).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1807\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Lofgren, C.S., Jouvenaz, D.P., Strin
ger, C.E., Bishop, P.M., Williams, D.F., Wojcik, D.P. and Glancey, B.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1981\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Techniques for collecting, rearing, and handling i
mported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  USDA, SEA, AATS-S-21, 9 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 1981\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Techniques for collecting, rearing, and hand
ling imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; bio
logy; colony; caste; diet; ecology; methods; handling; rearing; collecting; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Described are techniques for collecting and han
dling whole or partial field colonies of red and black imported fire ants; metho
ds and equipment for collecting newly mated queens and for rearing laboratory co
lonies; and techniques for adding new queens to established colonies, and using 
vacuum pickup systems with ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S
. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain
.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.7 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publ
ications   or 4.2 MB  }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/Banks_et_al-1981(M-1664).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or pdf & other fo
rmats available at  https://archive.org/details/IND81062677 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1799\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Lofgren, C.S., Jouvenaz, D.P., Wojci
k, D.P. and Summerlin, J.W.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  An improved mirex bait formulation for control of 
imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  2(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  182-185\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 April 1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  An improved mirex bait formulation for contr
ol of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28    https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/2.2.182 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Georgia; scientific; mating flight; population; mound; che
mical control; bait; reinfestation; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A new method was developed for for formulating 
mirex bait for control of Solenopsis richteri Forel and Solenopsis invicta Buren
.  The mirex is incorporated into the outer layer of soybean oil on the corncob 
grits and the bait is coated with an acrylic latex.  The oil content of the form
ulation can be increased by one-third, thus more oil or food attractant is avail
able to the ants.  Incorporation of the mirex in the oil on the surface of the g
rits makes a greater percentage of the insecticide available to the ants (89 vs.
 55% in the standard bait).  Field tests in Georgia with aerial applicalions of 
the new formulation against S. invicta showed that the coated bait containing 0.
1% mirex and applied at 1.0 lb per acre gave control comparable to standard bait
 containing 0.3% mirex applied at a rate of 1 1/4 lb per acre (99.6 vs. 99.1%, r
espectively).   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employ
ee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles
/Place/66151015/publications/Banks_et_al-1973(M-0831).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or pdf av
ailable through  https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/2/2/182/2393791 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 1803\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Banks, W.A., Lofgren, C.S. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1978\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A bibliography of imported fire ants and the chemi
cals and methods used for their control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  USDA, ARS, ARS-S-180, 35 p.  July 1978\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A bibliography of imported fire ants and the
 chemicals and methods used for their control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; 
chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavio
r; symbiont; predator; parasite; pathogen; impact; control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publicatio
ns   or 2.8 MB }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015
/publications/Banks_et_al-1978(M-1139).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or 2.7 MB http://www.ars
.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Banks_et_al-1978(M-2394).pdf 
  or pdf & other formats available at https://archive.org/details/bibliographyof
im180bank \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 58325\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Barriga, P.A., Sloan, J.V., Porter, S.D. and Sage
rs, C.L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Stable isotope enrichment in laboratory ant coloni
es: effects of colony age, metamorphosis, diet, and fat storage\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Entomol. Exp. Appl.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  149(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  265-272\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 2013; online 13 November 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Stable isotope enrichment in laboratory ant 
colonies: effects of colony age, metamorphosis, diet, and fat storage\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicat
a\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1111/eea.12126\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsid
ini; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; metamorphosis; diet; lipid stor
age on carbon; nitrogen; stable isotope ratios isotope discrimination; metamorph
ic enrichment; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Ecologists use stable isotopes to infer diets a
nd trophic levels of animals in food webs, yet some assumptions underlying these
 inferences have not been thoroughly tested. We used laboratory-reared colonies 
of Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsidini) to test the
 effects of metamorphosis, diet, and lipid storage on carbon and nitrogen stable
 isotope ratios. Effects of metamorphosis were examined in ant colonies maintain
ed on a control diet of domestic crickets and sucrose solution. Effects of a die
t shift were evaluated by adding a tuna supplement to select colonies. Effects o
f lipid content on stable isotopes were tested by treating worker ants with pola
r and non-polar solvents. \u948?13C and \u948?15N values of larvae, pupae, and w
orkers were measured by mass spectrometry on whole-animal preparations. We found
 a significant effect of colony age on \u948?13C, but not \u948?15N; larvae, pup
ae, and workers collected at 75 days were slightly depleted in 13C relative to c
ollections at 15 days (\u916?\u948?13C = \u8722?0.27\u8240?). Metamorphosis had 
a significant effect on \u948?15N, but not \u948?13C; tissues of each successive
 developmental stage were increasingly enriched in 15N (pupae, +0.5\u8240?; work
ers, +1.4\u8240?). Availability of tuna resulted in further shifts of about +0.6
\u8240? in isotope ratios for all developmental stages. Removing fat with organi
c solvents had no effect on \u948?13C, but treatment with a non-polar solvent re
sulted in enriched \u948?15N values of +0.37\u8240?. Identifying regular pattern
s of isotopic enrichment as described here should improve the utility of stable 
isotopes in diet studies of insects. Our study suggests that researchers using 1
5N enrichment to assess trophic levels of an organism at different sites need to
 take care not to standardize with immature insect herbivores or predators at on
e site and mature ones at another. Similar problems may also exist when standard
izing with holometabolous insects at one site and spiders or hemimetabolous inse
cts at another site.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government
 employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  Supporting information available through http://onli
nelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eea.12126/suppinfo \par }
{\f1\fs28 Word document, 21K; Table S1. ANOVA of the effects of developmental st
age and time on \u948?13C (above) and \u948?15N (below) of Solenopsis invicta. F
igure 1 shows mean \u948?13C and \u948?15N values for developmental stages.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Table S2. ANOVA of the effects of diet and developmental stage on \u948
?13C (above) and \u948?15N (below) on Solenopsis invicta. Mean values for develo
pmental stage and diet for C and N can be seen in Figure 1.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Table S3. ANOVA for the effect of ethanol and hexane-isopropanol on \u948
?15N of Solenopsis invicta. Mean \u948?15N \u177? SE = 6.32 \u177? 0.1 (control)
, 6.48 \u177? 0.1 (ethanol), and 6.62 \u177? 0.08 (hexane).\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 2724\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Bieman, D.N. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Tracking ants in Florida: The results of a Florida
 ant survey and a key to common structure-invading ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  PCO, FPCA Service Mag.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  4(April)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  cover, 11-13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Tracking ants in Florida: The results of a F
lorida ant survey and a key to common structure-invading ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  PCO, Florida Pest Control Association 
Service Magazine\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Camponotus americanus; Campono
tus floridanus; Monomorium floricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Paratrechina longico
rnis; Paratrechina parvula; Pheidole floridana; Pseudomyrmex mexicanus; Solenops
is invicta; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tetramorium simillimum; Dolichoderinae; For
micinae; Myrmicinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; popular; tax
onomy; key; biology; ecology; habits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28    http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615101
5/publications/Bleman_and_Wojcik-1990(M-2217).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 3520\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Bowers, M.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1981\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effect of foraging distance on water content of su
bstrates harvested by Atta colombica (Guerin)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  62\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  273-275\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effect of foraging distance on water content
 of substrates harvested by Atta colombica (Guerin)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta columbica; Myrmicinae; At
tini; North America; Panama; scientific; ecology; behavior; foraging; selection;
 foraging distance; water content; substrates; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibli
ography; from SDP, verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Bowers_and_Porter-1981(M-2361).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 3823\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Briano, J., Jouvenaz, D., Wojcik, D., Patterson, 
R. and Cordo, H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Protozoan and fungal diseases in Solenopsis richte
ri, and S. quinquecuspis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Buenos Aires Province, Arg
entina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  78(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  531-537\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Protozoan and fungal diseases in Solenopsis 
richteri, and S. quinquecuspis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Buenos Aires Provinc
e, Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Sole
nopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; colony distri
bution; population density; diversity; abundance; symbiont; myrmecophile; diseas
e; Protozoa; Microsporidia; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; Thelohaniidae; T
helohania solenopsae; fungi; Deuteromycotina; Hypomycetes; Myrmecomyces annellis
ae; endoparasitic fungus; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The diversity and abundance of protozoa and fun
gi infecting colonies of  the fire ants Solenopsis richteri Forel and S. quinque
cuspis Forel were surveyed in Buenos Aires province, Argentina. A total of 185 r
oadside sites was selected, and  1,836 colonies were sampled and examined under 
phase-contrast microscopy.   Pathogens were found at 32% of the sites and in 10%
 of the colonies. The microsporidium Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen & Hazard
 was the most common microorganism; it was present at 25% of the sites and 8% of
 the colonies. In some sites within  the surveyed region, the percentage of infe
cted colonies with T. solenopsae ranged from 40 to 80%.  Other pathogens present
 were the microsporidium Vairimorpha invictae Jouvenaz & Ellis and the fungus My
rmecomyces annellisae Jouvenaz & Kimbrough. A field site was selected for future
 ecological studies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government
 employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Paper presented at the symposium "The Myt
hs of Managing Resistance," 1994 Annual meeting of the Florida Entomological Soc
iety, August 8 11, 1994, Stuart, Florida.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Briano_et_al-1995(M-2988).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   http:
//www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe78p531.pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/articl
e/view/59157/56836   or pdf available through  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/a
rticle/view/59157 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 3826\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Briano, J.A., Calcaterra, L.A., Wojcik, D.P., Wil
liams, D.F., Banks, W.A. and Patterson, B.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Abundance of the parasitic ant Solenopsis daguerre
i (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America, a potential candidate for the biol
ogical control of the red imported fire ants in the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  26(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1143-1148\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Abundance of the parasitic ant Solenopsis da
guerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America, a potential candidate for th
e biological control of the red imported fire ants in the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ee/26.5.1143\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Solenopsis daguerr
ei; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis megergates; Solenopsis
 quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South Am
erica; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Paraguay; Uruguay; scientific; colony density
; season; distribution; population density; symbiont; myrmecophile; social paras
ite; Hymenoptera; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Abundance of the workerless parasitic ant Solen
opsis daguerrei (Santschi) in fire ant populations was surveyed in southern and 
southwestern Brazil, eastern, central, and northern Argentina, western and north
ern Uruguay, central Paraguay, and Bolivia from 1974 to 1996. A total of 12,180 
fire ant colonies was sampled from 726 collecting sites for the presence of adul
t or queens, or both, of the parasitic ant. The presence of the parasite in fire
 ant colonies within the area surveyed was very low. In Argentina, S. daguerrei 
occurred in the provinces of Buenos Aires, Santa Fe, and Entre Rios, in 1.4-7.0%
 of the colonies. In Brazil, the areas of Dourados, Campo Grande, and Rochedo, M
ato Grosso do Sul contained 1-6.2% of parasitized colonies. In Uruguay, < 1% of 
the colonies were parasitized. The parasite was not found in Paraguay and Bolivi
a. A new host (S. macdonaghi Santschi) is reported for S. daguerrei. The field w
ith the highest presence of S. daguerrei (7%) was selected in Buenos Aires provi
nce for ecological studies. The low presence in its native areas should not disc
ourage the potential use of this parasite as a biological control agent of impor
ted fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.7 MB  }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Use
rFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Briano_et_al-1997(M-3192).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or
 1.2 MB  http://ee.oxfordjournals.org/content/ee/26/5/1143.full.pdf   or pdf ava
ilable through  https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/26/5/1143/2395113 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 4872\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Calabi, P. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Worker longevity in the fire ant Solenopsis invict
a: ergonomic considerations of correlations between temperature, size and metabo
lic rates\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Insect Physiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  35(8)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  643-649\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 1989; online 1 October 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Worker longevity in the fire ant Solenopsis 
invicta: ergonomic considerations of correlations between temperature, size and 
metabolic rates\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Insect Physiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/0022-1910(89)90127-3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; size; temperature; polymorph
ism; ergonomic; caste; longevity; metabolic potential; respiration; division of 
labor; physiology; rate of living; bioenergetics; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We compared long-term economic costs of produci
ng and maintaining different size fire ant workers (Solenopsis invicta) at two t
emperatures (24 and 30\u176? C).  Energetic costs for three sizes of workers wer
e calculated from their biomass, longevity, respiration rates, and the energy co
ntent of worker tissue.  Large workers lived considerably longer than small work
ers (50-140%, depending on temperature) and respired more slowly per mg of tissu
e (40%, independent of temperature). Overall, large workers cost about 30% less 
in cal/mo x mg than equal weights of small workers.  However, on an individual b
asis, large workers were still four times more expensive than small workers beca
use of a 6-fold weight difference.  These data indicate that one large worker mu
st provide services equivalent to at least four small workers, to justify the co
lony's energy investment.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gover
nment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW; verified-SDP, USDA-CMAVE M-2366.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Calabi_and_Porter-1989(M-2366).pdf   or   https://eurekamag.com/fte
xt.php?pdf=002004691   or pdf available through https://eurekamag.com/research/0
02/004/002004691.php \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 45954\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Calcaterra, L., Porter, S. and Briano, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Studies of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis i
nvicta, infected with the Microsporidia Vairimorpha invictae and Thelohania sole
nopsae In Argentina.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Hoddle, M.E. and complier\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Second International Symposium on Biological 
Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005, Davos, Switzerland\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Forest Health Technology Enterprise Team
, Morgantown, WV, USA\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA, Forest Service; FHTET-2005-08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Number of Volumes:}{\f1\fs28  3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  102\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Studies of the red imported fire ant, Soleno
psis invicta, infected with the Microsporidia Vairimorpha invictae and Thelohani
a solenopsae In Argentina.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Jan 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Jan 10, in this file\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; brood; colony; dist
ribution; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Microsporidia; Burenellida
e; Vairimorpha invictae; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  After their accidental introduction into the Un
ited States more than 80 years ago, the red and black imported fire ants, Soleno
psis invicta Buren and Solenopsis richteri Forel (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) becam
e aggressive pests for people, domestic animals, agriculture, and wildlife.  A c
lassical biological control approach has been considered since the 1970\u180?s a
nd emphasized since 1988 with an intensive search of biological control agents i
n South America. The pathogens Vairimorpha invictae Jouvenaz and Ellis (Microspo
ridia: Burenellidae) and Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen and Hazard (Microspo
ridia: Thelohaniidae) are obligate intracellular microorganisms specific to fire
 ants. They were originally discovered in S. invicta in Mato Grosso, Brazil, and
 later found in other species of South American fire ants such as S. richteri, S
. quinquecuspis Forel and S. macdonaghi Santschi. They are important components 
of the complex of natural enemies that attack fire ants in South America; howeve
r, their effect on red imported fire ant populations in their native land was ne
ver reported. Thus, the objective of this study was to document the long-term ef
fects of both pathogens on field populations of the red imported fire ant. Fire 
ant populations and microsporidia prevalence were monitored 3-5 times per year f
or 4 years in eight field plots in northern Argentina. The mean population index
 per plot showed an overall reduction of 69%. The percentage of infection with V
. invictae and T. solenopsae showed fluctuations that ranged from 29.2 to 1.4% a
nd 13.6 to 2.6% respectively.  The highest infection rates were observed at the 
beginning of the study. A total of 394 colonies were sampled during the study, 3
25 (82.5%) were healthy and 69 (17.5%) were infected with microsporidia. The pro
portion of infected colonies with brood was 81% (56/69), similar to the proporti
on of healthy colonies with brood, 78% (255/325). The proportion of infected and
 healthy colonies in the population index categories was significantly different
.  Of the infected colonies with brood, 49.3% was medium and 1.4% was large in s
ize. In contrast, healthy colonies were larger, with 29.7 and 10.4% being medium
 and large, respectively. The general environmental conditions in the area of th
e plots were appropriate for fire ant population growth; consequently, they do n
ot explain the overall reduction in the populations.  These results, combined wi
th additional evidence reported previously, suggest that the infection with V. i
nvictae and T. solenopsae has deleterious effect on native populations of S. inv
icta.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on
 official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this file  http://www.bugwood.org/arthropod2005/v
ol3/15.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32704\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Calcaterra, L.A., Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution and abundance of fire ant decapitatin
g flies (Diptera: Phoridae: Pseudacteon) in three regions of Southern South Amer
ica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  98(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  85-95\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Jan. 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution and abundance of fire ant decap
itating flies (Diptera: Phoridae: Pseudacteon) in three regions of Southern Sout
h America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1603/0013-8746(2005)098[0085:DAAO
FA]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, May 05, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis electra; Solenopsis
 interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis richteri; Sol
enopsis quinquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Paraguay; 
scientific; colony; nest; temperature; relative humidity; distribution; symbiont
; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bulbosus; P
seudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon
 curvatus; Pseudacteon nr. disneyi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon nocens; P
seudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon obtusus large form; Pseu
dacteon obtusus small form; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pse
udacteon; impact; ecological; biocontrol; host range; host specificity; sex rati
o; species richness; species abundance; local assemblages; activity; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The distribution and abundance of fire ant deca
pitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae: Pseudacteon Coquillett) were studied in three
 regions of southern South America, primarily from September 2002 to September 2
004. A total of 2,421 flies belonging to 14 Pseudacteon species were found at 51
% of the 662 fire ant mounds examined at 125 collecting sites. Flies occurred in
 a variety of habitats at altitudes from sea level to 2,280 m. Pseudacteon obtus
us Borgmeier (large form) was found at the highest altitude and at the most west
ern longitude. Flies were active between 16 and 37 degrees C, 20 and 90% RH, and
 0 and 11.6 km/h wind speed. Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier showed the highest a
bundance and one of the broadest geographical distributions. Pseudacteon tricusp
is Borgmeier, P. litoralis Borgmeier, the large form of P. obtusus, P. nudicorni
s Borgmeier, and P. nocens Borgmeier also were widely distributed. These species
 seem to be the most generalized within saevissima-group. Pseudacteon solenopsid
is Schmitz was only collected attacking isolated workers. A new Pseudacteon spec
ies was discovered in northwestern Argentina. Seven fly species were reported fo
r the first time on a new fire ant host in this region. Pseudacteon cultellatus 
Borgmeier was found for the first time on Solenopsis invicta Buren in Corrientes
 province in northeastern Argentina, where up to nine fly species have been foun
d to co-occur. Males of P. tricuspis and P. obtusus were the only males normally
 attracted to disturbed fire ant colonies.   (This article was written and prepa
red by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pub
lic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3980.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=16
80&content=PDF  or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publica
tions/Calcaterra_et_al-2005(M-3980).pdf   or   https://www.researchgate.net/prof
ile/Luis_Calcaterra/publication/232688277_Distribution_and_Abundance_of_Fire_Ant
_Decapitating_Flies_Diptera_Phoridae_Pseudacteon_in_Three_Regions_of_Southern_So
uth_America/links/55c8a33508aea2d9bdc90f88.pdf   or    https://www.ars.usda.gov/
arsuserfiles/60360510/publications/Calcaterra_et_al-2005(M-3980).pdf   or pdf av
ailable through  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/98/1/85/161137 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 50932\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Callcott, A.M.A., Porter, S.D., Weeks, R.D., Grah
am, L.C., Johnson, S.J. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2011\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant decapitating fly cooperative release prog
rams (1994-2008): Two Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis and P. curvatus, rapidly
 expand across imported fire ant population in the southeastern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Insect Sci.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11: 19\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  25 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Online publication date: 1-April-2011\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant decapitating fly cooperative releas
e programs (1994-2008): Two Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis and P. curvatus, r
apidly expand across imported fire ant population in the southeastern United Sta
tes\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Insect Science (online)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1673/031.011.0119\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-25, Sep 11\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Ok
lahoma; Puerto Rico; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; scientific; mounds; symbi
ont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudact
eon tricuspis; release; distribution; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Natural enemies of the imported fire ants, Sole
nopsis invicta Buren, S. richteri Forel (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), and their hyb
rid, include a suite of more than 20 fire antdecapitating phorid flies from Sout
h America in the genus Pseudacteon. Over the past 12 years, many researchers and
 associates have cooperated in introducing several species as classical or self-
sustaining biological control agents in the United States. As a result, two spec
ies of flies, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier and P. curvatus Borgmeier (Diptera
: Phoridae), are well established across large areas of the southeastern United 
States. Whereas many researchers have published local and state information abou
t the establishment and spread of these flies, here distribution data from both 
published and unpublished sources has been compiled for the entire United States
 with the goal of presenting confirmed and probable distributions as of the fall
 of 2008. Documented rates of expansion were also used to predict the distributi
on of these flies three years later in the fall of 2011. In the fall of 2008, el
even years after the first successful release, we estimate that P. tricuspis cov
ered about 50% of the fire ant quarantined area and that it will occur in almost
 65% of the quarantine area by 2011. Complete coverage of the fire ant quarantin
ed area will be delayed or limited by this species' slow rate of spread and freq
uent failure to establish in more northerly portions of the fire ant range and a
lso, perhaps, by its preference for red imported fire ants (S. invicta). Eight y
ears after the first successful release of P. curvatus, two biotypes of this spe
cies (one biotype occurring predominantly in the black and hybrid imported fire 
ants and the other occurring in red imported fire ants) covered almost 60% of th
e fire ant quarantined area. We estimate these two biotypes will cover almost 90
% of the quarantine area by 2011 and 100% by 2012 or 2013. Strategic selection o
f several distributional gaps for future releases will accelerate complete cover
age of quarantine areas. However, some gaps may be best used for the release of 
additional species of decapitating flies because establishment rates may be high
er in areas without competing species.   (This article was written and prepared 
by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public 
domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.9 MB http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1673/031.011
.0119   or 5.8 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publicati
ons/Callcott_et_al-2011(M-5095).pdf   or 6 MB http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download
/49436/PDF   or 0.9 MB http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/55467/PDF   or 0.9 MB 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3281391/pdf/031.011.0119.pdf   or 6
 MB pdf available through html  https://academic.oup.com/jinsectscience/article/
11/1/19/2492334   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.net/10113/49436   o
r pdf available through http://handle.nal.usda.gov/10113/55467   or html http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3281391/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 5124\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Carlson, D.A., Banks, W.A. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distortion of mirex residues in insects owing to u
se of isopropyl alcohol as a collection solvent\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  365-369\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distortion of mirex residues in insects owin
g to use of isopropyl alcohol as a collection solvent\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bulletin of Environmental Contaminatio
n and Toxicology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; pitfall; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[RIFA were used to show that mirex residues wi
ll move to uncontaminated insects when collected & stored in alcohol.  Weight lo
ss of ants subjected to various regimes is given.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-0845.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or     http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Carls
on_et_al-1973(M-0845).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 34155\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Causton, C.E., Sevilla, C.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Eradication of the little fire ant; Wasmannia auro
punctata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), from Marchena Island, Gal\u225?pagos: on the
 edge of success?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  88(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  159-168\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Eradication of the little fire ant; Wasmanni
a auropunctata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), from Marchena Island, Gal\u225?pagos: 
on the edge of success?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2005)088[0159:EO
TLFA]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Feb 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Monomori
um floricola; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; M
yrmicinae; South America; Ecuador; Galapagos Islands; Marchena Island; scientifi
c; colonies; colony budding; dry season; native biodiversity; chemical control; 
amdro; hydramethylnon; bait; bait dispersal; costs; monitoring; eradication; met
hods; linear transects; food baits; peanut butter baits stick; invasive species;
 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The development of effective techniques to erad
icate populations of invasive ant species is crucial to the conservation of nati
ve biodiversity. An intensive program was initiated in 2001 to eradicate the inv
asive little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata (Roger) from ~21 ha on Marchena Is
land in the Gal\u225?pagos Archipelago. Linear transects, approximately 10 m apa
rt, were cut through the vegetation of the infested area and a buffer zone of 6 
ha. Amdro\u174? (Hydramethylnon) was applied manually up to three times in the t
reatment area at three-month intervals between March and October 2001. To date, 
five follow-up monitoring surveys have placed sticks painted with peanut butter 
in a grid 3-4 m apart. Two small populations (0.1% of the area originally occupi
ed by W. auropunctata) were detected in April and October 2002 and were subseque
ntly treated with Amdro\u174?. No W. auropunctata ants were found in May 2003 an
d April 2004. Five nocturnal surveys carried out in the immediate area of introd
uction of W. auropunctata did not detect any individuals. Monitoring surveys wil
l continue for an additional two years to ensure eradication of any remaining po
pulations and verify the success of this program. This paper discusses the proce
dures used to kill W. auropunctata and monitor the efficacy of the eradication m
ethods, the program's costs, and its applicability to other island ecosystems.  
 (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offici
al time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW, 
verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/3448   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul 
p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Causton_et_al-2005
(M-4230).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/7541
2/73070  or   or   http://b3.net.nz/gerda/refs/99.pdf   or   http://www.issg.org
/database/species/reference_files/wasaur/Causton_etal_2006.pdf   or   http://www
.littlefireants.com/fe88p159.pdf   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla
.edu/flaent/article/view/75412   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.e
du/flaent/issue/view/3580   or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/0015-
4040%282005%29088%5B0159%3AEOTLFA%5D2.0.CO%3B2 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 72694\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Chen, L. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2020\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera
: Phoridae) that parasitize ants of the Solenopsis saevissima complex (Hymenopte
ra: Formicidae) in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insects\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11(2), 107\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  10 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  published 6 February 2020\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Pseudacteon decapitating flies (D
iptera: Phoridae) that parasitize ants of the Solenopsis saevissima complex (Hym
enoptera: Formicidae) in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insects\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.3390/insects11020107\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-75, Mar 20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis electra; Solenopsis
 gayi; Solenopsis interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenop
sis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis saevis
sima complex; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Chile; Paraguay; rev
iew; workers; biology; distribution; habitat; niche partitioning; season; behavi
or; mutualism; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteo
n affinis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon bulbosus; Pseudacteon comatus; Ps
eudacteon conicornis; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon
 dentiger; Pseudacteon disneyi; Pseudacteon fowleri; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseu
dacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusitus; Pseudacteon obtus
us; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; Pseudacteon
; koinobiontic; natural enemies; red imported fire ant; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) parasitiz
e individual ant workers, causing decapitation of the host during pupariation. P
horid flies that attack South American fire ants in the Solenopsis saevissima (S
mith) complex are distributed across a wide range of habitats and climates assoc
iated with the geographical range of their hosts. Sympatric species sharing the 
same hosts often partition niche resources by season, active time of day, host s
ize, and/or different host activities. They have the potential of being used for
 biological control of the imported fire ants in North America, Australia, and A
sia.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on 
official time and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB pdf available through  https://www.mdpi.com/2
075-4450/11/2/107   or 1.2 MB  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7073
655/pdf/insects-11-00107.pdf   or html  https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4450/11/2/107/
htm   or html  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7073655/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47200\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Clair, D.J., Mulder, R., Porter, S., Bhatkar, A. 
and Vinson, S.B.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Survey of monogyne and polygyne fire ant colonies 
in Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 75-78, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler & ed.
], Proceedings of the 1988 imported fire ant conference, May 4-5, 1988, Athens, 
Georgia, 175 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Survey of monogyne and polygyne fire ant col
onies in Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1988_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; worker; queens; nest; monogyny; polygyn
y; colonies; mound counts; baits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 5.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/6/68/1988_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 7057\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Davis, L.R., Jr., Vander Meer, R.K. and Porter, S
.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants expand their range across t
he West Indies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  84(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  735-736\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants expand their range ac
ross the West Indies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, May 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; Antigua; Bahama Islands; Abaco Island; Grand Bahama Island; Gor
da Cay; British Virgin Islands; Guana Island; United States; Virgin Islands; St.
 Croix; Turks and Caicos Islands; Providenciales; South America; Trinidad; Carib
bean; scientific; distribution; invasive species; spread; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We present new records for Solenopsis invicta f
rom the Bahama Islands (Abaco Island, Grand Bahama Island, and Gorda Cay) and th
e first records from the British Virgin Islands (Guana Island); the United State
s Virgin Islands (St. Croix, 2 sites); the Turks and Caicos Islands (Providencia
les, 7 sites), Antigua (4 sites); and the island of Trinidad.  These records ind
icate that this potentially damaging species is becoming widely distributed acro
ss the West Indies.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/75033/7
2691   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Dav
is_et_al-2001(M-3657).pdf  or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/fla
ent/issue/view/3566 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38296\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Davis, T., Horton, P.M., Williams, D.F., Collins,
 H.L., Oi, D.H., Drees, B.M., Barr, C.H., Vinson, S.B., Gold, R.E., Merchant, M.
C., Riggs, N., Hickman, B., Nester, P., Kostroun, D., Sparks, B., Pollet, D., Sh
anklin, D., Loftin, K., Vail, K., Flanders, K., Koehler, P., Wright, R., Porter,
 S.D., Periera, R.M., Briano, J.A. and Mudge, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red Imported Fire Ant DoD IPM Training Manual\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Clemson University Extension Service, Clemso
n, SC, 61 pages\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red Imported Fire Ant DoD IPM Training Manua
l\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; South Carolina; extension; biology; ecology; impact; agric
ulture; chemical control; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 7550\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Denmark, H.A. and Porter, J.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Regulation of importation of arthropods into and o
f their movement within Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  56\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  347-358\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Regulation of importation of arthropods into
 and of their movement within Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; administrative; quarantine; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A committee has been established to regulate th
e movement of arthropods into and within the State of Florida which is composed 
of: Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Plant I
ndustry and Division of Animal Industry; Florida Department of Health and Rehabi
litative Services; University of Florida, Department of Entomology and Nematolog
y; U. S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service; U. S. Departm
ent of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service Foreign Quarantine P
rogram; and Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission. Among the organisms fo
r which requests have been made (170 to date) are: insects, millipedes, mites, s
corpions, spiders, ticks, snails, and protozoan malaria parasites. They were req
uested for a variety of studies, including insecticidal tests, biological contro
l investigations with parasites and predators, genetic studies, and ant colonies
, scorpions, and spiders for both scientific studies and as pets.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 45381\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Epperson, D.H., Allen, C.R. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effect of red imported fire ants on Gopherus p
olyphemus at Camp Shelby, MS: Some preliminary results\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  75-80, In: Proceedings of the 1999 Imported 
Fire Ant Conference, March 3-5, 1999, Charleston, South Carolina, 154 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effect of red imported fire ants on Goph
erus polyphemus at Camp Shelby, MS: Some preliminary results\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Dorymyrmex bureni; Solenopsis 
invicta; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Mississippi; scientific
; impact; ecological; wildlife; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; baits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Epperson_et_al-1999(M-3366).pdf   or in this 8.3 MB file    http://
www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/3/32/1999_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47476\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Epperson, D.M., Allen, C.R. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impacts of a non-native ant, Solenopsis invicta, o
n a keystone vertebrate, Gopherus polyphemus, and associated commensal fauna.  [
abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 109, In: J.L. Croker, K.M. Vail, & R.M. P
ereira (ed.), Proceedings of the 2000 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 5-7, 2
000, Chattanooga, Tennessee, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impacts of a non-native ant, Solenopsis invi
cta, on a keystone vertebrate, Gopherus polyphemus, and associated commensal fau
na.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Mississippi; scientific; impact; ecological; wildlife; gop
her tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; baits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The gopher tortoise, Gopherus polyphemus, is a 
fossorial species native to the southeastern United States.  Tortoise numbers ar
e decreasing throughout their range and red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invic
ta) may be contributing to this decline.  In some habitats, as many as 50% of bu
rrow aprons have S. invicta mounds present placing emerging hatchlings in close 
proximity to foraging S. invicta.  This study experimentally manipulates fire an
t densities to determine the potential impacts of fire ants on hatchling surviva
l.  Approximately 12 weeks prior to hatchling emergence, half of the study sites
 (n=10) were treated with Logic-7 to reduce fire ant densities.  S. invicta dens
ities were significantly (P less-than .05) reduced at all treated sites.  After 
hatchling emergence, hatchlings (n=20) had radiotransmitters attached and were t
racked daily until mortality.  All hatchlings were killed by predators before re
aching one year of age.  Of these mortalities, 25% (n=5) were killed by S. invic
ta.  In all cases of S. invicta induced mortality, the hatchlings were either in
 untreated areas or had dispersed out of treated areas.  These data indicate tha
t S. invicta are significant predators on tortoise hatchlings.   (This article w
as written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is 
therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 13.2 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/2/2a/2000_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 9648\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Evans, B.R. and Porter, J.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1965\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The incidence, importance, and control of insects 
found in stored food and food-handling areas of ships\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  58(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  479-481\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 June 1965\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The incidence, importance, and control of in
sects found in stored food and food-handling areas of ships\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/58.3.479\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-90, Dec 21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Azteca; Camponotus; Dorymyrmex
; Monomorium pharaonis; Neoponera; Paratrechina longicornis; Ponera; Pseudomyrme
x; Solenopsis; Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseu
domyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; Louisiana; scientific; impact; urban;
 quarantine; chemical control; mechanical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Inspection of 1193 ships in New Orleans & 235
 ships in Miami has shown that a wide variety of insects infest the stored food 
& food-handling areas of ships.  Neoponera collected from ships in New Oleans; t
he rest collected from ships in Miami.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/jee/
article/58/3/479/789917   or pdf available through  https://in.booksc.me/book/55
230900/d4d2bb \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 43927\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Finlayson, C.J., Alyokhin, A.V. and Porter, E.W.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Interactions of native and non-native lady beetle 
species (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) with aphid-tending ants in laboratory arenas
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  38(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  846-855\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Interactions of native and non-native lady b
eetle species (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) with aphid-tending ants in laboratory 
arenas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/022.038.0338\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-17, June 09\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmica rubra; Myrmicinae; Nor
th America; USA; Maine; scientific; mutualism; tending Hemiptera; Macrosiphum eu
phorbiae; predator-prey relationships; coccinellid; native; non-native; natural 
enemies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Interactions between lady beetles and the Europ
ean fire ant (Myrmica rubra L.) tending potato aphids [Macrosiphum euphorbiae (T
homas)] were compared in the laboratory. Lady beetle species native to North Ame
rica (Coccinella trifasciata perplexa Mulsant, Coleomegilla maculata lengi Timbe
rlake, Hippodamia convergent Gu\u233?rin-M\u233?neville) and non-native species 
of Palearctic origin [Coccinella septempunctata L., Harmonia axyridis (Pallas), 
Hippodamia variegata (Goeze), Propylea quatuordecimpunctata L.)] were evaluated.
 Harmonia axyridis consumed a significantly greater number of aphids compared wi
th all other species but C. septempunctata. Ant stings affected H. variegata and
 C. septempunctata to a greater extent than other species. Ants showed a signifi
cantly greater amount of aggression toward H. convergent and H. variegata compar
ed with P. quatuordecimpunctata. P. quatuordecimpunctata, C. trifasciata, and H.
 axyridis reacted significantly less to ants compared with H. variegata, H. conv
ergens, C. maculata, and C. septempunctata. Differences in interactions with nat
ural enemies may explain, in part, the successful establishment of some non-nati
ve coccinellids in new habitats.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 09; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through htm http://ee.oxfordjournals.o
rg/content/38/3/846.full   or pdf available through html https://academic.oup.co
m/ee/article/38/3/846/550477/Interactions-of-Native-and-Non-Native-Lady-Beetle \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33621\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Flanders, K., Graham, L.C., Porter, S. and Oi, D.
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Alabama Cooperative Extension Service, Alaba
ma A &M & Auburn Universities, ANR-1149 (Rev), 2 p.  revised May 2005, web only\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Mar 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tr
icuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.aces.edu/pubs/docs/A/ANR-11
49/ }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40574\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Flanders, K., Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D. and Oi, 
D.H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Alabama Cooperative Extension Service, Alaba
ma A &M & Auburn Universities, ANR-1149 (Rev), 3 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-13, Dec 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon cu
rvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniida
e; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Since 1998, the Alabama Fire Ant Management Pro
gram has been releasing natural enemies of imported fire ants.  These natural en
emies are being studied to determine their impact on fire ants. It is hoped that
 eventually the overall number of fire ants in Alabama can be reduced through bi
ological control methods. This publication provides information about fire ant p
arasitic flies (Pseudacteon spp.) and updated information about other biological
 control agents of fire ants that are being studied. Decapitating flies have now
 been released in sixteen Alabama counties and two species, Pseudacteon curvatus
 and Pseudacteon tricuspis, have established populations that are spreading thro
ughout the state at a rate of 10 to 12 miles per year. Currently, populations co
ver one-half to two-thirds of Alabama.  Pseudacteon litoralis was released in Wi
lcox County in 2005 and is the first location in the US where three species of d
ecapitating flies co-exist.  Thelohania solenopsae a pathogen of fire ants was r
eleased in Macon County, however it has not established.  Research on the biolog
ical control of fire ants is continuing with viruses and nematodes being recentl
y discovered infecting this invasive pest.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Flanders_et_al-2008(M-4294).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 10154\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Flanders, K., Porter, S. and Oi, D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Alabama Cooperative Extension Service, Alaba
ma A &M & Auburn Universities, ANR-1149, 2 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tr
icuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 00; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3374.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Flanders_et_al-1999(M-3374).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 37426\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Flanders, K., Porter, S. and Oi, D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Alabama Cooperative Extension Service, Alaba
ma A &M & Auburn Universities, ANR-1149, 2 p., Revised 10/2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tr
icuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3374.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38568\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Flanders, K., Porter, S. and Oi, D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Alabama Cooperative Extension Service, Alaba
ma A &M & Auburn Universities, ANR-1149 (Rev), 2 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  revised May 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of red imported fire ants
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; extension; population; mound; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; biocontrol; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tr
icuspis; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32733\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Folgarait, P.J., Bruzzone, O., Porter, S.D., Pesq
uero, M.A. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biogeography and macroecology of phorid flies that
 attack fire ants in south-eastern Brazil and Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Biogeogr.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  32(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  353-367\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  February 2005; online 20 Jan. 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biogeography and macroecology of phorid flie
s that attack fire ants in south-eastern Brazil and Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Biogeography\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2004.01177.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 05, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific;
 ecology; distribution; Ropoport's rule; species diversity; species richness; cl
imate; climatic factors; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid;
 Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon affinis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon bul
bosus; Pseudacteon comatus; Pseudacteon conicornis; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Ps
eudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon dentiger; Pseudacteon d
isneyi; Pseudacteon fowleri; Pseudacteon lenkoi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudact
eon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pse
udacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; 
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Aim: Saevissima group fire ants, Solenopsis ric
hteri and S. invicta, have become serious pests when introduced from Argentina a
nd Brazil to other continents. In South America, Solenopsis are distributed acro
ss a great variety of habitats and climates. In North America, S. invicta, intro
duced free of phorids, now ranges from coast to coast in the south. Success in i
ntroducing particular Pseudacteon as agents for the biological control of fire a
nts has varied across climatic zones.   We aimed at assembling all the informati
on about fire ant phorids from Argentina and Brazil, to estimate their richness 
and geographical ranges, to perform a climatic analysis for these distributions,
 to define groups and climate-based communities, and to test and elucidate Rapop
ort's biogeographical rule.   Location Argentina and Brazil (South America).  Me
thods: From field and museum collections and historical records, we developed a 
 database of fire ant-specific phorids throughout their known geographical range
. A total of 123 sites with values for 15 climatic variables were mapped between
 10degrees and 38degrees SL and between 35degrees and 65degrees C WL for the pre
sence/absence of phorids. We calculated species richness across all sites combin
ed, and for each phytogeographical region, using rarefaction curves, and ICE and
 Mmean estimators. We calculated mid-latitudinal points, geographical ranges and
 areas for each species.  The correlation between mid-latitudinal point and rang
es/areas was tested against a null model generated from the randomization of the
 raw distributional data. We used several types of multivariate analyses to dist
inguish groups of phorids by phytogeographical regions, hosts and climate, to fi
nd gradients of climate throughout the studied area, to define phorid communitie
s in terms of their relationships with gradients of climate, and to test a mecha
nism for Rapoport's rule.  Results Richness estimations using ICE and Mmean esti
mators were similar or higher than the observed values depending on the phytogeo
graphical region. Cluster multivariate analyses based on climatic, phytogeograph
ic and host data revealed distinct groupings of Pseudacton. The 'cerrado' group 
was confined to tropical savanna areas. A more 'widespread' group included 'Chac
o' and 'Maritime' subgroups defined by their respective association with extreme
 temperatures or precipitation. Ordination multivariate analyses showed (1) two 
climatic gradients throughout the study area: one of temperature and the other o
f precipitation, and (2) that climatic variables significantly explained the obs
erved assemblages of phorids. Positive and negative signs of the eigenvalues fro
m the main axes of a canonical correspondence analysis allowed us to define eigh
t communities whose geographical distribution resembled that of phytogeographica
l regions. We found a significant and positive correlation between geographical 
areas and mid latitudinal points, and furthermore, the Mantel test based on clim
atic variables suggested a mechanism for Rapoport's rule applying in the case of
 Pseudacteon.  Main conclusions: Pseudacteon species with greater mid-latitudina
l points occupy broader geographical areas and confront more stressful environme
ntal conditions.  Because the composition of Pseudacteon communities is largely 
determined by climatic variables, the correspondence between climates at sites o
f origin vs. sites of release should be an important consideration in choosing s
pecific phorids for biocontrol efforts.   (This article was written and prepared
 by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public
 domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-9886.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=2816&content=PDF  or 1.1 MB http://hormigas.unq.edu.ar/publicaciones/paper
s/JBI_Folgarait%20etAl%202005%5B1%5D.pdf   or 1.1 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2
UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Folgarait_et_al-2005(M-3986).pdf   or pdf 
available through  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/2816   or pdf available through h
ttp://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 55046\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Folgarait, P J., Bruzzone, O.A., Porter, S.D., Pe
squero, M.A. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Geographic ranges and patterns of diversity for Ps
eudacteon flies, parasitoids of Solenopsis ants, from Argentina and Brazil.  [ab
stract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  In: XXI International Congress of Entomology
, Abstracts, Foz do Igua\u231?u, Brazil, 20-26 August 2000, Vol. I, p. 126\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Geographic ranges and patterns of diversity 
for Pseudacteon flies, parasitoids of Solenopsis ants, from Argentina and Brazil
.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-31, Jan 13; IN: 2000 vol.1 XXI Int. Congr. Ent
omol. Brazil Ses.03Biogeog& Biodiv\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; worker; dis
tribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; b
iocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  More than 40 species have been described within
 the cosmopolitan genus Pseudacteon, which specializes in attacking Solenopsis a
nts and is being considered to be used as a biological control tool in USA. Info
rmation on Pseudacteon records and distribution is currently dispersed and hardl
y published. However, this type of data is very important as a source of informa
tion on phorids localities for future captures and to infer phorids climatic tol
erances to rear and release them at proper places in the States. Using bibliogra
phic information, data from brazilian museums, and collections made by the autho
rs, we compiled a data base on Pseudacteon throughout the distribution range of 
the two exotic fire ant pests, Solenopsis invicta (red) and Solenopsis richteri 
(black). The whole area included the region between 10-40\u186?S and 35-65\u186?
W encompassing Argentina and Brazil. We used the grid method to estimate richnes
s per cell and per phytogeographical regions and calculated equiprobabilistic cu
rves following Rapoport (1982). We also estimated geographical ranges and climat
ic correlates for each species and classify them as broadly or narrowly distribu
ted species. Equiprobabilistic curves were calculated for each cell using as cen
tral points of observations four cells that span a latitudinal gradient. These c
ells were: Goiania-Brasilia (GB), Belo Horizonte-Sao Paulo (BHSP), Corrientes (C
O), and Capital-Buenos Aires (CBA); the first two in Brazil and the latter two i
n Argentina. There was no clear latitudinal pattern in species richness but phyt
ogeographical regions in Brazil had greater diversity. However, the pattern of s
pecies that were lost from the centers of observations towards other cells chang
ed consistently if the center was calculated at lower latitudes or at higher one
s. This means that most of the species found at CO and CBA represented assemblag
es of species found in GB and BHSP, and represented species with broad geographi
c ranges and climatic tolerances. These data suggest that the introduction of br
oadly distributed Pseudacteon species will be more successful because these spec
ies have been able to spread across different climatic and phytogeographical reg
ions and may have greater physiological tolerances to abiotic variables. In fact
, broadly distributed Pseudacteon flies represent species that currently find re
d and black fire ants throughout their geographic range of distribution.   (This
 article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official tim
e, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 13; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 1.2 MB file http://www.seb.org.br/eventos/CB
E/XVIIICBE/SESSIONS/SESSION3.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36895\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Forys, E.A., Allen, C.R., Epperson, D.M. and Wojc
ik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential impacts from red imported fire ants on t
urtles.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Abstract in G. L. Heinrich and P. A. Meylan,
 coordinators. A Second Symposium on the Status and Conservation of Florida Turt
les and the 1999 Annual Meeting of the Gopher Tortoise Council, 8-11 October 199
9, Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, Florida, USA\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential impacts from red imported fire ant
s on turtles.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; Mississippi; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife;
 turtle; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36910\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Forys, E.A., Allen, C.R., Epperson, D.M. and Wojc
ik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential impacts from red imported fire ants on t
urtles.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Tortoise Burrow, Bulletin of the Gopher Tort
oise Council 20(1):3-4\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential impacts from red imported fire ant
s on turtles.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; Mississippi; scientific; biology; impact; ecological; wildlife;
 turtle; gopher tortoise; Gopherus polyphemus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32771\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Forys, E.A., Allen, C.R. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence of the proximity and amount of human dev
elopment and roads on the occurrence of the red imported fire ant in the lower F
lorida Keys\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Conser.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  108\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  27-33\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  November 2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence of the proximity and amount of hum
an development and roads on the occurrence of the red imported fire ant in the l
ower Florida Keys\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Conservation\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/S0006-3207(02)00086-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-33, June 13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; endangered species; hab
itats; habitat destruction; foraging; invasion; chemical control; fragmentation;
 impact; ecological; wildlife; lower keys marsh rabbit; Sylvilagus palustris hef
neri; Big Pine Key ringneck snake; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We examined the influence of both the proximity
 and extent of human developments and paved roads on the presence of the predato
ry, non-indigenous, red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta). This species was
 inadvertently introduced into the United States at the port of Mobile, Alabama,
 around 1930 and rapidly spread to many southeastern states, including Florida. 
More recently, S. invicta colonized the Florida Keys, an area with a high propor
tion of rare and endemic vertebrate and invertebrate species. We placed bait tra
nsects in transitional salt-marsh, pineland, and hardwood hammocks on 13 of the 
lower Florida Keys and compared habitat type, the shortest distance of the bait 
transect to a development or road, and area of development and roads 50, 70, 100
, and 150 m around each bait transect for areas with and without red imported fi
re ants. Red imported fire ants were detected on 21 of the 80 transects and were
 equally abundant in all habitat types. While all of the development and road va
riables differed significantly between bait transects with and without red impor
ted fire ants, transects that were closest to roads and that had the largest amo
unt of development within a 150 m radii had the highest probability of presence 
of red imported fire ants. Recovery efforts for endangered species in areas inva
ded by red imported fire ants should include analyses of the cumulative impacts 
of roads and developments in areas near protected lands.   (This article was wri
tten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is theref
ore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?ar
ticle=1041&context=ncfwrustaff   or   http://s3.amazonaws.com/file-storage.INDIV
IDUAL-ACTIVITIES-CooperativeResearchUnits.digitalmeasures.usgs.edu/allencr/intel
lcont/Forysetal-1.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18483\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Forys, E.A., Quistorff, A., Allen, C.R. and Wojci
k, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The likely cause of extinction of the tree snail O
rthalicus reses reses (Say)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Mollus. Stud.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  67(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  369-376\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  August 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The likely cause of extinction of the tree s
nail Orthalicus reses reses (Say)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Molluscan Studies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1093/mollus/67.3.369\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-33, June 13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; foraging; invasion; endangered specie
s; habitats; habitat destruction; chemical control; hydramethylnon; baits; effic
acy; population density; invasive species; impact; ecological; Papilio aristodem
us ponceanus; habitat loss; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The Stock Island tree snail, Orthalicus reses r
eses, went extinct in its native range in the Florida Keys in 1992. Fortunately,
 O. r. reses has been introduced elsewhere and further reintroductions are curre
ntly planned. Before these reintroductions are implemented, it is important to t
ry and determine which factors were most likely to have caused the decline and e
xtinction. While habitat destruction was prob-ably the ultimate reason why there
 were so few tree snails, it is likely that an interaction of habitat frag-menta
tion and the invasion of an exotic predator caused the final decline that lead t
o the extinction in 1992. We examined the last 93 O. r. reses shells to infer ca
use of death. In addition, using surrogate Florida tree snails, Liguus fasciatus
, we conducted experiments on two previously unstudied causes of mortality: pred
ation by red imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta, and mortality from falls ca
used by wind.  We found that the majority of the last O. r. reses shells were in
tact, indicating that mammalian and bird predation were not the greatest causes 
of mortality. Mortality caused by wind knocking tree snails onto the rocky hammo
ck substrate appeared to be a potential source of mortality, but few of the tree
 snails exhibited signs of breakage. Mortality from fire ants appears to be one 
of the most likely causes of the recent decline and extinction of O. r. reses. E
xperiments indicated that in a semi-natural enclosure, fire ants were capable of
 killing all ages of L. fasciatus, even during aestivation. Fire ants are curren
tly found throughout the last known habitat of O. r. reses and were first discov
ered in this area at the time of the decline.   (This article was written and pr
epared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the 
public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 04; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.8 MB  http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewconten
t.cgi?article=1005&context=ncfwrustaff   or 0.4 MB  http://mollus.oxfordjournals
.org/content/67/3/369.full.pdf+html   or 1.8 MB  https://www.researchgate.net/pr
ofile/Elizabeth_Forys/publication/228701586_The_likely_cause_of_extinction_of_th
e_tree_snail_Orthalicus_reses_reses_%28Say%29/links/00463521410a2e4de2000000.pdf
   or 0.4 MB  http://s3.amazonaws.com/file-storage.INDIVIDUAL-ACTIVITIES-Coopera
tiveResearchUnits.digitalmeasures.usgs.edu/allencr/intellcont/IFAtreesnails-1.pd
f \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 10824\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Fowler, H.G., Campiolo, S., Pesquero, M.A. and Po
rter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Notes on a southern record for Solenopsis geminata
 (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Iheringia Ser. Zool.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  79\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  173\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: 25 Sept. 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Notes on a southern record for Solenopsis ge
minata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Iheringia, S\u233?rie Zoologia\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; Minas Gerais; scientific; distr
ibution; nest; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus;
 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[This note reports the southern most record fo
r S. geminata in Brazil, at Vi\u231?osa.   It is sympatric in this urban area wi
th S. saevissima.  P. curvatus, a parasite of S. saevissima, was seen to hover o
ver S. geminata but no attacks were observed.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; verified-DPW; from ANTBIB; Date on photocopy sent by Sanford Porter (28.vi.1
996): "29 set. 1995", verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Fowler_et_al-1995(M-3433).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 10828\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Fowler, H.G., Pesquero, M.A., Campiolo, S. and Po
rter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonal activity of species of Pseudacteon (Dipte
ra: Phoridae) parasitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis saevissima) (Hymenoptera: For
micidae) in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Cientifica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  23(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  367-371\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonal activity of species of Pseudacteon 
(Diptera: Phoridae) parasitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis saevissima) (Hymenopter
a: Formicidae) in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Cient\u237?fica, Sa\u245? Paulo\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmici
nae; South America; Brazil; scientific; season; behavior; activity; symbiont; my
rmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon aduncus; Pseuda
cteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtus
us; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol;
 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The seasonal activity of the complex of species
 of the parasitoid phorid taxa Pseudacteon attacking colonies of the fire ant So
lenopsis saevissima is documented.  The seasonally most constant as well as the 
most abundant species were P. tricuspsis and P. litoralis, with the remaining sp
ecies (P. obtusus, P. pradei, P. aduncus [not aduncus, probably P. borgmeieri] a
nd P wasmanni) being  much less abundant and consequently less seasonally consta
nt.  Because of the broad seasonaliy exhibited by the complex of these phorid pa
rasites, their colonization success in areas of introducted populations of the f
ire ants for biological control should not be limited by seasonal effects.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 98; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; verified-SDP, USDA-CMAVE M-3287.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/public
ations/Fowler_et_al-1995(M-3287).pdf }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 10836\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Fowler, H.G., Pesquero, M.A., Campiolo, S., Zacar
o, A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Formiga perde a cabe\u231?a por causa de mosca\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ciencia Hoje\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  21(122)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  63-64\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Formiga perde a cabe\u231?a por causa de mos
ca\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ci\u234?ncia Hoje\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmici
nae; South America; Brazil; popular; behavior; foraging; activity; symbiont; myr
mecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from TEK; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3057.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publi
cations/Fowler_et_al-1996(M-3057).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 58226\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Gavilanez-Slone, J. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Colony growth of two species of Solenopsis fire an
ts (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) reared with crickets and beef liver\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  96(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1482-1488\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Colony growth of two species of Solenopsis f
ire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) reared with crickets and beef liver\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.096.0428\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-38, Feb 14\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Camponotus \u64258?oridanus; M
onomorium \u64258?oricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Nylanderia fulva; Pheidole dent
ata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North Amer
ica; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; artificial diets; development; mass rea
ring; beef liver; Acheta domesticus; Gryllodes sigillatus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Most diets for rearing fire ants and other ants
 contain insects such as crickets or mealworms. Unfortunately, insect diets are 
expensive, especially for large rearing operations, and are not always easily av
ailable or uniformly effective. This study was designed to examine colony growth
 of Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) fire ants fed beef liver. Five experime
nts were performed: four with Solenopsis invicta Buren colonies and one with Sol
enopsis geminata (F.) colonies. In these experiments, we compared the net growth
 of colonies fed raw liver, boiled liver-agar, and/or raw liver-agar all with ho
use crickets (Acheta domesticus, (L.); Orthoptera: Gryllidae) as a standard diet
. Both liver and house cricket diets produced healthy growing colonies at the en
d of 6-8 wk. However, colonies fed crickets were 1.7 to 3 times larger than thos
e fed with liver. Raw liver and raw liver-agar diets performed similarly. Boilin
g the liver significantly reduced colony growth in S. geminata, but liver boiled
 for as long as 45 min still produced healthy fire ant colonies. This study demo
nstrates that beef liver is an acceptable diet for rearing laboratory colonies o
f both S. invicta and S. geminata for periods up to 6 months when maximum growth
 rates are not needed. However, house crickets are recommended for research stud
ies where maximal growth is important because liver, mealworms, and banded crick
ets (Gryllodes sigillatus, F. Walker; Orthoptera: Gryllidae) are not as effectiv
e. Poor survival of liver-fed colonies after 8 months may indicate that beef liv
er is not an acceptable long-term diet. Pilot tests with canned liver cat food a
nd a dry dog food showed they were palatable but not suitable for brood producti
on in fire ant colonies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Govern
ment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.096.0428  
 or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.096.0428 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 58778\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Gavilanez-Slone, J. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2014\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Laboratory fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) 
fail to grow with Bhatkar diet and three other artificial diets\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  61(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  281-287\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Aug. 2014; online 27 June 2014\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Laboratory fire ant colonies (Solenopsis inv
icta) fail to grow with Bhatkar diet and three other artificial diets\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00040-014-0353-7\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-42, July 15\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae
; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South Carolina; scientific; rearing; 
Orthoptera; colonies; artificial diets; meridic diet; oligidic diet; holidic die
t; mass rearing; insect culture; carpenter ants; fire ants; rearing; sugars; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Various artificial diets have been used for rea
ring imported fire ants; however most of these diets include insect supplements.
 This study was designed to examine growth of red imported fire ant colonies (So
lenopsis invicta Buren) on four artificial diets: a chemically undefined "oligid
ic" predator diet, two partly defined "meridic" diets utilized by Bhatkar and Wh
itcomb (Florida Entomol. 53: 229-232, 1970) and Dussutour and Simpson (Insect. S
oc. 55: 329-333, 2008) for Solenopsis fire ants and Rhytidoponera ants, respecti
vely, and finally a completely chemically defined "holidic" diet utilized by Str
aka and Feldhaar (Insect. Soc. 54: 100-104, 2007a, Insect. Soc. 54: 202, 2007b E
rratum) for carpenter ants. Crickets and sugar water were used as a standard die
t. After 6 weeks, fire ant colonies fed crickets and sugar water were healthy an
d had grown considerably. In contrast, colonies fed the artificial diets showed 
little or no growth demonstrating that these diets are not suitable for rearing 
healthy fire ant colonies. Nevertheless, the holidic or entirely synthetic Strak
a diet may provide a suitable basis for further studies of fire ant dietary requ
irements because it resulted in modest production of all brood stages. We advise
 caution in using diets that mix sugar and protein into a single "all in one" di
et because workers and brood have differing dietary requirements.   (This articl
e was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and 
is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 15; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.byformica.com/images/f/f1/Gavilanez-Slone
,_Porter_(2014).pdf   or   https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00040-
014-0353-7.pdf   or html  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00040-014-0
353-7 \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplementary material 1 (PDF 4316 kb) available through http://link.s
pringer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00040-014-0353-7   or   https://static-content.sp
ringer.com/esm/art%3A10.1007%2Fs00040-014-0353-7/MediaObjects/40_2014_353_MOESM1
_ESM.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplementary material 1 (PDF 4316 kb): Test colonies and food managem
ent, Dussutour diet, Predator diet, First Bhatkar diet, Second Bhatkar diet, Str
aka diet, References, List of chemicals contaend in each vitamin-mineral capsule
 or tablet used in the meridic Bhatkar diets, List of chemicals used in the holi
dic Straka diet (amounts based on final volume of 100 ml).\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39898\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Gilbert, L.E., Barr, C., Calixto, A.A., Cook, J.L
., Drees, B.M., LeBrun, E.G., Patrock, R.J.W., Plowes, R., Porter, S.D. and Puck
ett, R.T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introducing phorid fly parasitoids of red imported
 fire ant workers from South America to Texas: Outcomes vary by region and by Ps
eudacteon species released\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwest. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  33(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  15-29\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introducing phorid fly parasitoids of red im
ported fire ant workers from South America to Texas: Outcomes vary by region and
 by Pseudacteon species released\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwestern Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-12, June 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; South America; Brazil; Argenti
na; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; climate; temperature; drought; distribution;
 behavior; foraging; attack behavior; oviposition; symbiont; myrmecophile; paras
ite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; P
seudacteon tricuspis; host specificity; biocontrol; field releases; release site
; parasitoid establishment; rearing; host specificity; parasite strain; oviposit
ion; impact; ecological; biocontrol; introduced species; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Since the first status report on Pseudacteon de
capitating fly introductions to Texas there have been significant developments i
n release activities across a range of release sites by a variety of participant
s. Systematic and widespread monitoring of population expansion by established P
seudacteon populations has been ongoing.  Prior to 2002, establishment success b
y the widely released initial species, P. tricuspis, was poor.  Two factors, sev
ere drought in 1996-2001, and host-size dependent sex ratio were proposed constr
aints on establishing this species.  In recent years however, these limitations 
have been lifted in some areas by periods of favorable weather, irrigation of re
lease sites, and/or by use of a smaller Pseudacteon species, P. curvatus, not re
liant on larger fire ant workers to produce females.  Beginning in 2002, the USD
A-APHIS collaboration with USDA-ARS and Texas Cooperative Extension programs, be
gan to supplement release sites in Texas beyond those initiated by the UT Austin
 phorid fly project.  In 2005, private citizens began to participate in the spre
ad of Pseudacteon to new sites. As of fall 2006, P. tricuspis, expanding from re
leases conducted between 1999 and 2001, can be found in over more than 7 million
 acres of Central and Coastal Texas, while P. curvatus, with its later start, is
 only now beginning an expansion phase in some sites.  South Texas continues to 
present problems for Pseudacteon populations that have established more easily i
n mesic and moderate climates.  However, recently two prior 'failed' sites were 
revealed to be false negatives after the record rains of summer 2007. Starting i
n late 2006, the first releases of P. obtusus in North America have resulted in 
establishment, and releases of 3-5 additional species are underway.   (This arti
cle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, an
d is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW; from-SDP.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  5.9 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Gilbert_et_al-2008(M-4307).pdf   or 5.9 MB http://afrsweb.us
da.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Gilbert_et_al-2008(M-4307).pdf  
 or 5.9 MB  http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rob_Plowes/publication/232682049
_Introducing_Phorid_Fly_Parasitoids_of_Red_Imported_Fire_Ant_Workers_from_South_
America_to_Texas_Outcomes_Vary_by_Region_and_by_Pseudacteon_Species_Released/lin
ks/0deec52670b972b3ee000000.pdf   or 5.9 MB https://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/dow
nload.xhtml?id=15359&content=PDF   or pdf available through  http://hdl.handle.n
et/10113/15359 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 11613\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Glancey, B.M., Nickerson, J.C., Wojcik, D., Trage
r, J., Banks, W.A. and Adams, C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The increasing incidence of the polygynous form of
 the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Flor
ida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  70(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  400-402\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  25 Sept. 1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The increasing incidence of the polygynous f
orm of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) i
n Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polygyny; distribution; chemical cont
rol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1967; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   http://www.ars.us
da.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Glancey_et_al-1987(M-1967).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 11618\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Glancey, B.M., Vander Meer, R.K. and Wojcik, D.P.
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Polygyny in hybrid imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  72(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  632-636\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Polygyny in hybrid imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Mississippi; scientific; chemistry; venom; cuticular hydrocarbons; polygyny; ge
netics; behavior; clustering; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The occurrence of polygyny in hybrid fire ants 
from Mississippi was initially indicated by the clustering behavior of the worke
rs around queens. Polygyny was demonstrated by the rate of oviposition of isolat
ed queens, and dissection of samples of queens for the presence of sperm in the 
spermatheca. The colonies were identified as S. invicta/S. richteri hybrids by g
as chromatograph analyses of venom alkaloids and cuticular hydrocarbons.   (This
 article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official tim
e, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2178.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Glancey_et_al-1989(M-2178).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flae
nt/article/view/58553/56232 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 11595\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Glancey, B.M., Wojcik, D.P., Craig, C.H. and Mitc
hell, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Ants of Mobile County, AL, as monitored by bait tr
ansects\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Georgia Entomol. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  191-197\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: July 1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Ants of Mobile County, AL, as monitored by b
ait transects\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of the Georgia Entomological S
ociety\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster texana; Brachymy
rmex; Camponotus pennsylvanicus; Conomyrma; Crematogaster clara; Formica schaufu
ssi dolosa; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Monomorium minimum; Monomor
ium viridum peninsulatum; Paratrechina; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens;
 Pheidole moerens; Tetramorium guineense; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Fo
rmicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; ecology; distribu
tion; community; collecting; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A survey in Mobile County, AL, made along three
 north-south transects at 0.5-mile intervals) ca. 25 to 40 miles long showed tha
t the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, was the dominant species.
 A total of 16 species of ant was collected including the once dominant species,
 the Argentine ant, Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). The native North American fire a
nts, S. xyloni McCook, and S. germinata (F.) were not collected.   (This article
 was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and i
s therefore in the public domain.)          *[Pheidole sp. D = Pheidole moerens]
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1071; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Glancey
_et_al-1976(M-1071).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48132\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D. and Bertagnolli, V.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in Alabama: A tale of two species.  [
abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 44, In: L. Greenberg & C. Lerner [ed.], P
roceedings of the 2003 Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 30-April 1, 2003,
 Palm Springs, CA, 145 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in Alabama: A tale of two speci
es.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2003_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; extension; symbiont; myrmecophile; p
arasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Two species of phorid fly have been released at
 11 sites in Alabama and have been recovered from nine of these sites. Pseudacte
on tricuspis was released in South Alabama in populations of the red imported fi
re ant, Solenopsis invicta, and Pseudacteon curvatus was released in North Alaba
ma in hybrid fire ant populations (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsis richteri).  N
umber of mounds per acre and mound size was recorded for all release sites and f
or control sites, if established. Data from the three oldest sites are presented
. Mound numbers decreased at two release sites, but increased at the third. Furt
her analysis and data collection are needed to determine the long term effect of
 phorid flies on Alabama fire ants.   (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 21 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/0/03/2003_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33502\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D. and Bertagnolli, V.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004(2003)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in Alabama: a tale of two species\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Agric. Urban Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  20(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  165-171\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Accepted for publication 7 May 2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in Alabama: a tale of two speci
es\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Agricultural and Urban Ento
mology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-29, Apr 12\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Alabama; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pse
udacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; invasive species; biocontrol; distribu
tion; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Two species of phorid fly have been released at
 11 sites in Alabama and have been recovered from 9 sites. Pseudacteon tricuspis
 Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) was released in South Alabama in populations of t
he red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), an
d Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier was released in North Alabama in hybrid fire an
t populations (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsis richteri Forel). The number of mo
unds per hectare and mound size was recorded for all release sites and for contr
ol sites, if established. Data from the three oldest sites are presented. Mound 
numbers decreased at two release sites, but increased at the third. Further anal
ysis and data collection are needed to determine the longterm effect of phorid f
lies on Alabama fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gove
rnment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-xxxx.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.2 MB http://scentsoc.org/Volumes/JAUE/v20/165.pdf 
\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48109\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D., Bertagnolli, V.E., Do
rough, H.D. and Kelley, A.T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment of the phorid fly, Pseudacteon curva
tus, in Alabama for biological control of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 104-105, In: D. Suiter, et al., [compilie
rs], Proceedings of the 2002 Imported Fire Ant Conference, 24-26 March 2002, Ath
ens, GA, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment of the phorid fly, Pseudacteon
 curvatus, in Alabama for biological control of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, March 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta X richteri 
hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; behavior; symbiont;
 myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; release; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In 2001, flies were found in May and July.  On 
Aug.16, several areas around the release site were sampled.  No flies were found
 to the south of the release site.  However, the phorids were found in mounds ap
proximately 1.1 kilometers north of the release site.  This is the first success
ful establishment of Pseudacteon curvatus in the United States.   (This article 
was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is
 therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 10.7 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/a/a6/2002_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48342\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D., Briano, J.A., Bertagn
olli-Heller, V.E. and Ridley, K.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid Flies in Alabama: Pseudacteon litoralis add
ed to the list\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  no pagination (105-107), In: T. Davis, et al
. [compiliers], Proceedings of Annual Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 24-26,
 2008, Charleston, SC, 131 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid Flies in Alabama: Pseudacteon litoral
is added to the list\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, March 10; IN: a-2008_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Alabama; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pse
udacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; invasive specie
s; releases; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon litoralis was released in Wilcox Co
unty in 2005, which is infested with Solenopsis invicta.  No P. litoralis were r
ecovered in the field in 2005. In 2006, one P. litoralis female was collected in
 the area of the farm where the release occurred in five collecting trips.  Thre
e collecting trips were made on 21 May, 28 June, and 9 Aug in 2007.  On the firs
t trips, no flies were collected.  However on the last trip, seven P. litoralis 
females were collected in the area.  The flies had moved from the original relea
se area and were beginning to spread from the release site.  Pseudacteon litoral
is are active for a few hours after sunrise and a few hours just before sunset. 
 The release site is a 2.5 hour drive from our lab, so we are not able to collec
t as often as we would like to document the spread of P. litoralis.  We plan to 
use sticky traps to monitor movement in 2008 in addition to collection at mounds
.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on off
icial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 5.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/6/6e/2008_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48357\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D., Briano, J.A., Ridley,
 K. and Bertagnolli, V.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2010(2009)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon litoralis in Alabama: established but 
hard to find.  [poster presentation]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 21, In: J. Cooper, et al. [compiliers], P
roceedings of the 2009 Imported Fire Ant & Invasive ant Conference (Proceedings 
of the Annual Imported Fire Ant Conference), April 6-9, 2009, Oklahoma City, Okl
ahoma, 33 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon litoralis in Alabama: establishe
d but hard to find.  [poster presentation]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; colonies; symbiont; myrmecophile; Dip
tera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki
/files/8/89/2009_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18542\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D., Flanders, K.L., Kelle
y, A.T., Dorough, H.D. and Hudson, R.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction of phorid flies for biological contro
l of fire ants in Alabama.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 151-152, In: S.B. Vinson, S. Ellison, & D
. Bush [compiliers], Proceedings of the Southwestern ESA Branch Fire Ant Symposi
a and the 2001 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, Feb. 28-March 2, 2001, San
 Antonio, Texas, 260 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction of phorid flies for biological 
control of fire ants in Alabama.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile;
 parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; bio
control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-SDP; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 16.6 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/4/44/2001_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 12267\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Graham, L.C., Porter, S.D., Pereira, R.M., Doroug
h, H.D. and Kelley, A.T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field releases of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon
 curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) for control of imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Fo
rmicidae) in Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  86(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  334-339\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field releases of the decapitating fly Pseud
acteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) for control of imported fire ants (Hymenopte
ra: Formicidae) in Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2003)086[0334:FROT
DF]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Jun 04\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Alabama; Florida; Tennessee; scientific; distribution; mound; symbiont; myrmeco
phile; parasitoids; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biocontrol; parasit
oid establishment; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The little decapitating fly, Pseudacteon curvat
us Borgmeier, was released at 11 sites in Alabama, Florida, and Tennessee as a p
otential self-sustaining biocontrol agent of imported fire ants. We used a bioty
pe from Buenos Aires Province, Argentina that parasitizes black fire ants (Solen
opsis richteri Forel). Generally, several thousand flies were released as larvae
 in parasitized ant workers over a 1-2 week period. Pseudacteon curvatus flies w
ere successfully established on hybrid fire ants (Solenopsis invicta x Solenopsi
s richteri) at a site near Talladega, Alabama where they have persisted more tha
n two years and expanded out 5-20 km from the original release site. Flies faile
d to establish in Florida and Tennessee although a few 1st-generation field-rear
ed flies were recovered at four sites in Florida. This fly is only the second pa
rasitoid species to be successfully released against imported fire ants or any o
ther pest ant species. Possible reasons for failures at the other sites include 
insufficient vegetation cover, competition with another Pseudacteon species in F
lorida, severe winter kill of ants at a site in Tennessee, and the possibility t
hat the biotype of P. curvatus released was not a viable parasitoid of red impor
ted fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government emplo
yee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 04; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3888.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Graham_et_al-2003(M-3888).pdf   or      https://naldc-legacy.nal.us
da.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=3014&content=PDF   or pdf available through  http
s://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/catalog.xhtml?id=3014&start=0&searchText=Mor
rison&searchField=&sortField=   or pdf available through html  https://bioone.or
g/journals/florida-entomologist/volume-86/issue-3/0015-4040_2003_086_0334_FROTDF
_2.0.CO_2/FIELD-RELEASES-OF-THE-DECAPITATING-FLY-PSEUDACTEON-CURVATUS-DIPTERA/10
.1653/0015-4040(2003)086[0334:FROTDF]2.0.CO;2.full \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 35606\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Gray, K.J., Porter, C., Hawkey, P.M., Compton, S.
G. and Edwards, J.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Roger's ant: a new pest in hospitals\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Brit. Med. J. Clinical Res.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  311(6997)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  129\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  8 July 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Roger's ant: a new pest in hospitals\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  British Medical Journal of Clinical Re
search\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.311.6997.129b\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-53, Mar 17\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Hypoponera punctatissima; Pone
rinae; Europe; Great Britain; scientific; distribution; impact; medical; hospita
l; stings; bacteria; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[We report what we believe to be the first inf
estation of a hospital by Roger's ants, Hypoponera punctatissima. Winged ants we
re first sighted around the nurses' station in the cardiac intensive care unit i
n October 1994, & several staff members reported multiple stings from the ants.]
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2550188
/pdf/bmj00600-0063c.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40575\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Hahn, D.A., Martin, A.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Body size, but not cooling rate, affects supercool
ing points in the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  37(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1074-1080\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Body size, but not cooling rate, affects sup
ercooling points in the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0046-225X(2008)37[1074:BSB
NCR]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-13, Dec 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; physiology; body size; allom
etry; cooling rate; supercooling points; cold tolerance; cold stress; temperatur
e; thermoregulation; freezing; supercooling; correlation; thermodynamics; overwi
ntering; winter hardiness; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The level of an animal's stress resistance is s
et by multiple intrinsic physiological and extrinsic environmental parameters. B
ody size is a critical intrinsic parameter that affects numerous fitness-related
 organismal traits including fecundity, survival, mating success, and stress res
istance. The rate of cooling is a critical extrinsic environmental factor that c
an affect thermal stress resistance. Workers of the red imported fire ant, Solen
opsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), display considerable variation in
 adult body size. Therefore, developing ecologically realistic models of thermot
olerance in this species requires a consideration of body size. We tested the hy
pothesis that body size and cooling rate would interact to set the supercooling 
point in fire ant workers by exposing workers of a range of body sizes to three 
different cooling regimens: a very fast ramp of -10\u176?C/min, an intermediate 
ramp of -1\u176?C/min, and an ecologically relevant slow ramp of -0.1\u176?C/min
. Specifically, we asked whether large workers were more susceptible to differen
ces in cooling rate than smaller workers. We found that body size had a consider
able effect on supercooling point with the largest workers freezing at a tempera
ture -3\u176?C higher than the smallest workers. Cooling rate had a very small e
ffect on supercooling point, and there was no interaction between the two factor
s. Therefore, the allometry of supercooling points across the range of worker bo
dy sizes does not change with cooling rate.   (This article was written and prep
ared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pu
blic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Hahn_et_al-2008(M-4314).pdf   or   http://hdl.handle.net/10113/2369
8   or   http://ee.oxfordjournals.org/content/ee/37/5/1074.full.pdf   or   https
://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publications/Hahn_et_al-2008(M-4314).p
df   or pdf available through html  https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/37/5/107
4/400889 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 13139\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Haynes, D.L., Wojcik, D.P., Allen, J.C., Campbell
, R., Carroll, C.R., Hsiao, T.H., Logan, J. and Stinner, R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The theory of population dynamics\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Battenfield, S.L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Proceedings of the Symposium on the Imported 
Fire Ant, June 7-10, 1982 Atlanta American Hotel, Atlanta, Georgia\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Washington, D.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USEPA, USDA-APHIS\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  50-66\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The theory of population dynamics\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; review; biology; physiology; genetics
; ecology; behavior; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2413.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Haynes_
et_al-1982(M-2413).pdf   or in this 15.6 MB file https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF
.cgi/9101O7Q9.PDF?Dockey=9101O7Q9.PDF \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48186\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Henne, D.C., Johnson, S.J. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dispersal of the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon tri
cuspis Borgmeier, a biological control agent of the red imported fire ant Soleno
psis invicta Buren in Southeast Louisiana.  [poster presentation]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 136 or p. 135 [abstract], In: D. Pollet, 
S. Johnson, P. Beckley and S. Clayton [ed.], Proceedings of the 2004 Annual Red 
Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 21-23, 2004, Baton Rouge, LA, 203 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dispersal of the decapitating fly, Pseudacte
on tricuspis Borgmeier, a biological control agent of the red imported fire ant 
Solenopsis invicta Buren in Southeast Louisiana.  [poster presentation]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2004_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Louisiana; scientific; mounds; distribution; symbiont; myr
mecophile; parasitoids; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; re
lease; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment of Pseudacteon tricuspis has been
 confirmed at the following release locations in SE Louisiana: (1) -1 3 km north
 of Covington (St. Tammany Parish), (2) -8 km east of Norwood (East Feliciana Pa
rish).  During September and October, dispersal of P. tricuspis was evaluated in
 four cardinal directions from the release point (N, S, E, and W), at increasing
 distances until no flies were observed.  At each evaluation site, 8-12 S. invic
ta mounds were disturbed and monitored for 30 minutes.  Pseudacteon tricuspis ha
ve dispersed almost 14.5 km from the Covington release site since fall 1999 and 
almost 10 km from the Nonvood release site since spring 2000.  Average number of
 flies observed per S. invicta mounds in fall 2003 were 0.69 flies/mound at the 
Covington release site and 1.04 flies/mound at the Nonvood release site.  The ra
te of dispersal at the Covington release site has not yet reached an asymptotic 
rate, implying that the rate of dispersal is increasing.   (This article was wri
tten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is theref
ore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 13 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/0/07/2004_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38506\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Henne, D.C., Johnson, S.J. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Status of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteo
n tricuspis (Diptera: Phoridae) in Louisiana\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  90(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  565-569\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Status of the fire ant decapitating fly Pseu
dacteon tricuspis (Diptera: Phoridae) in Louisiana\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2007)90[565:SOTF
AD]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Louisiana; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid;
 Diptera; Pseudacteon tricuspis; parasitoids; biocontrol agents; population dist
ribution; distribution; methodology; parasitoid releases; release methods; paras
itoid establishment; range expansion; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Eight releases of the South American fire ant d
ecapitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, were conducted in Louisiana fr
om 1999 to 2006. Although P. tricuspis was initially recaptured at 88% of the re
lease sites, four of the releases ultimately failed, so long-term establishment 
was only 43%. Fly populations from two releases have expanded out 50-80 km from 
their release sites (Fall 2006).   (This article was written and prepared by U.S
. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain
.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, From-SDP.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=61
26&content=PDF   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/henne_et_al-2007(M-4238).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   http://journ
als.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/75697/73355   or pdf available through  http://
hdl.handle.net/10113/6126 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 13450\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Heraty, J.M., Wojcik, D.P. and Jouvenaz, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Species of Orasema parasitic on the Solenopsis sae
vissima-complex in South America (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae, Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Hym. Res.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  2(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  169-182\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Species of Orasema parasitic on the Solenops
is saevissima-complex in South America (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae, Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Hymenoptera Research\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole nitidula; Pheidole ra
doszkowskii; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; South America;
 Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Colombia; Ecuador; Guyana; Paraguay; Peru; Uruguay;
 scientific; biology; taxonomy; key; ecology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; 
parasite; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Eucharomorpha paraguayensis; Orasema doello
juradoi; Orasema crassa; Orasema pireta; Orasema salebrosa; Orasema simplex; Ora
sema worcesteri; Orasema xanthopus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Life history of O. xanthropus is discussed.] 
    Orasema salebrosa Heraty & Orasema simplex Heraty are parasitoids of Solenop
sis richteri Forel.  Orasema worcesteri (Girault) (referred to as O. doello-jura
doi Gemignani) is a parasitoid of Pheidole radoszkowskii Mayr (referred to as P.
 nitidula Emery).  Orasema xanthopus (Cameron) is a parasitoid of Solenopsis inv
icta Buren.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee
(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2803.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or 5.8 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/He
raty_et_al-1993(M-2803).pdf   or   http://cache.ucr.edu/~heraty/literature%20cop
y/heratyWoJo1993.PDF   or 1.2 MB  http://www.nhm.ac.uk/resources/research-curati
on/projects/chalcidoids/pdf/HeratyWoJo993.pdf   or 2.1 MB  http://www.faculty.uc
r.edu/~heraty/literature%20copy/heratyWoJo1993.PDF \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 13984\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Hook, A.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Destruction of harvester ant colonies by invading 
fire ants in South-central Texas (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwest. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  35(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  477-478\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Destruction of harvester ant colonies by inv
ading fire ants in South-central Texas (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwestern Naturalist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex barbatus; Solenop
sis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; prey; 
ecology; mounds; interspecific interactions; aggression; mortality; competitive 
replacement; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  At the Brackenridge Field Laboratory in Texas, 
USA, only 1 of 5 colonies of Pogonomyrmex barbatus attacked by invading colonies
 of the polygyne form of Solenopsis invicta survived.  Observations of antagonis
tic interactions between the 2 species of ants are described in detail.  (abstra
ct provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2386.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 14115\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Hoy, J.B., Porter, S.D. and Koehler, P.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A microcomputer-based activity meter for multiple 
animals\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Neurosci. Methods\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  72\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  183-188\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A microcomputer-based activity meter for mul
tiple animals\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Neuroscience Methods\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; foraging activity; trail; rec
ruitment; methods; video system; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We describe and validate a computer-video syste
m that records and displays in real-time the activity of multiple specimens in a
 user-defined space, at user-defined intervals.  The computer program uses image
 subtraction algorithms to record changes in video images, and stores observatio
ns in column format or as a series of 2-D matrices.  The program was tested unde
r various lighting conditions, backgrounds, specimen size and specimen speed.  A
n AV model of Macintosh computer with video input from a camera or video cassett
e recorder was used to record and analyze the mechanical movement of spots on a 
turntable and  the locomotor activity of an ant colony.  The limitations and pot
ential applications of the program are discussed.   (This article was written an
d prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in 
the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from-SDP; verified-SDP; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3204.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Hoy_et_
al-1997(M-3204).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 72842\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Hu, L., Vander Meer, R.K., Porter, S.D. and Chen,
 L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Cuticular hydrocarbon profiles differentiate tropi
cal fire ant populations (Solenopsis geminata, Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Chem. Biodivers.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  14(11), e1700192\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  8 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  November 2017; online 11 July 2017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Cuticular hydrocarbon profiles differentiate
 tropical fire ant populations (Solenopsis geminata, Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Chemistry & Biodiversity\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1002/cbdv.201700192\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-75, Apr 20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicina
e; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; cuticular hydrocarbons; n\u8208?alka
nes; n\u8208?alkenes; tricosane; tricosene; (Z)\u8208?9\u8208?tricosene; distrib
ution; color forms; dark form; red form; GC/MS; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The cuticular hydrocarbons (CHCs) from hexane r
inses of workers from two Florida populations (dark and red forms) of the tropic
al fire ant, Solenopsis geminata, were separated by silica gel chromatography an
d identified by GC/MS analysis. Both the dark form and the red form produce simi
lar CHCs with carbon chain lengths ranging from 17 to 35. However, the relative 
percentages of these CHCs were consistently different between the two color form
s. The largest CHC component in the dark form is tricosane, and (Z)\u8208?9\u8208
?tricosene for the red form. There were several significant differences in perce
nt composition. For example, the dark form was characterized by a low tricosene:
tricosane ratio (ca. 0.25), whereas this ratio was > 2.5 for the red form. The r
atio of tricosene:tricosane can be used as a diagnostic biomarker to delimit the
 dark and red forms. Cluster analysis showed that the CHCs patterns of dark form
 colonies are completely separated from the CHC pattern of red form colonies. Di
fferences in social behaviors like nestmate recognition and polygyny between wor
kers from this dark form and the red form await further investigation.   (This a
rticle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time 
and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.2 MB  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Lin_Hu2
/publication/318378410_Cuticular_Hydrocarbon_Profiles_Differentiate_Tropical_Fir
e_Ant_Populations_Solenopsis_geminata_Hymenoptera_Formicidae/links/5cf63a5aa6fdc
c847503058a/Cuticular-Hydrocarbon-Profiles-Differentiate-Tropical-Fire-Ant-Popul
ations-Solenopsis-geminata-Hymenoptera-Formicidae.pdf   or  pdf available throug
h   http://ir.ioz.ac.cn/bitstream/000000/12888/1/Cuticular%20hydrocarbon%20profi
les%20differentiate%201.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15083\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jorgensen, C.D. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging behavior of Pogonomyrmex owyheei in South
east Idaho\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  381-384\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  01 April 1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging behavior of Pogonomyrmex owyheei in
 Southeast Idaho\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/11.2.381\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Myrmicin
ae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; diet; distribution; territory; foragi
ng; distance; success rate; transit speed; searching time; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging behavior of Pogonomyrmex owyheei Cole 
was studied from 1977 to 1979 in Raft River Valley, Idaho.  Average foraging dis
tances were positively correlated with the estimated number of foragers per colo
ny.  Foraging trips took an average of 11.3 min, with 64% of this time spent in 
transit and 36% searching.  Of the foragers, 75% returned with food, 21% with ro
ck or debris, and 4% without a payload.  Foraging ranges of individual colonies 
seldom overlapped, and aggressive encounters between ants of neighboring colonie
s were not observed.  Concepts of territoriality may be unnecessary to explain s
pace and resource partitioning among adjacent colonies of P. owyheei.   (abstrac
t provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP, verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Jorgensen_and_Porter-1982(M-2368).pdf   or pdf available through  h
ttps://academic.oup.com/ee/article/11/2/381/2480202 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15108\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jouvenaz, D.P., Allen, G.E., Banks, W.A. and Wojc
ik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A survey for pathogens of fire ants, Solenopsis sp
p., in the Southeastern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  60(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  275-279\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A survey for pathogens of fire ants, Solenop
sis spp., in the Southeastern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; US
A; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; South Carolina; scientific
; pathogen; microsporidium; Protozoa; Microsporida; neogregarine; Sporozoa; Neog
regarinida; yeasts; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In a survey conducted in the Southeastern Unite
d States, one colony in a sample of 1,007 colonies of the red imported fire ant,
 S. invicta Buren, was infected with a microsporidium (Protozoa: Microsporida). 
The normal host of this parasite appears to be the tropical fire ant, S. geminat
a (F.).  A benign or very mildly pathogenic yeast was associated with 93 (9.24%)
 of the S. invicta colonies, and was most common in areas which have been infest
ed with this ant for the longest periods.  No pathogens were associated with 83 
colonies of the black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri Forel. The apparent
 rarity of bona fide pathogens in imported fire ants in the United States is in 
marked contrast to the abundance of pathogens in these and other Solenopsis spp.
 in South America.  Four species of microsporidia (possibly new genera) were det
ected in 22 (7.2%), 12 (3.9%), 6 (2.0%), and 4 (1.3%) of 307 colonies of the tro
pical fire ant, S. geminata. One colony of this species was infected by a neogre
garine (Sporozoa: Neogregarinida). No pathogens were found in a small sample (53
 colonies) of the Southern fire ant, S. xyloni McCook.   (This article was writt
en and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefor
e in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1115.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Jouvenaz_et_al-1977(M-1115).pdf   or   https://journals.flvc.org/fl
aent/article/view/57232/54911   or pdf available through  https://journals.flvc.
org/flaent/article/view/57232 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15126\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jouvenaz, D.P., Vander Meer, R.K. and Wojcik, D.P
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid, Orasema spp., (H
ymenoptera: Eucharitidae) of fire ants. [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  P. 243 in: XVIII International Congress of E
ntomology. Vancouver, B. C.; Canada, July 3-9, 1988. Proceedings of the 18th Int
ernational Congress of Entomology, Abstract Volume.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid, Orasema sp
p., (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae) of fire ants. [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; symbiont
; myrmecophile; parasite; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2317.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15132\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jouvenaz, D.P. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitic nematode observed in the fire ant, Solen
opsis richteri, in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  73(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  674-675\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitic nematode observed in the fire ant,
 Solenopsis richteri, in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.2307/3495284   or   http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEn
t/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicina
e; South America; Argentina; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; patho
gen; nematode; mermithid nematode; biocontrol; disease transmission; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  During a survey for natural enemies of Solenops
is in Argentina in 1987, colonies of S. richteri were found to be infected by ne
matodes different from those previously observed.  In each colony, fewer than 1%
 of workers were parasitized by one large (about 15 mm) nematode per host. The p
arasite appeared to be a larval mermithid and therefore unidentifiable to genus.
   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offi
cial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2376.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://fulltextt10.fcla.edu/DLData/SN/SN00154040/007
3_004/98p08075.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/pu
blications/Jouvenaz_and_Wojcik-1990(M-2376).pdf   or  http://journals.fcla.edu/f
laent/article/view/58675/56354    or pdf available through  http://journals.fcla
.edu/flaent/article/view/58675 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15127\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jouvenaz, D.P., Wojcik, D.P., Naves, M.A. and Lof
gren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on a parasitic nematode (Tetradonemat
idae) of fire ants, Solenopsis (Formicidae), from Mato Grosso\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pesq. Agropec. Brasil.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  23\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  525-528\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on a parasitic nematode (Tetrad
onematidae) of fire ants, Solenopsis (Formicidae), from Mato Grosso\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pesquisa Agropecuaria Brasileira\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; caste; mound; colony; behavior; symbiont; m
yrmecophile; pathogen; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; Tetradonema; biocontrol; 
disease transmission; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitic nematodes, Tetradonerma sp. (Mermitho
idea: Tetradonematidae) were observed in the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren,
 for the first time. Five colonies in a sample of 14 colonies from one site in M
ato Grosso were infected. The infection rate among adult workers was 12.5% in on
e colony and less than 5% in each of the remaining colonies. Adult reproductive 
males and females, eggs, and juvenile nematodes were observed in the haemocoel o
f male and worker ants. The infected worker ants often can be recognized by thei
r slightly enlarged gasters, the dorsal sclerites of which may have a scalloped 
appearance. There are no other morphological signs of infection and no observabl
e changes in behavior. Infected adult males contained normal sperm. An attempt t
o transmit the nematode to colonies of S. invicta in the United States was unsuc
cessful.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s)
 on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1680.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Jouvena
z_et_al-1988(M-1680).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 15128\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Jouvenaz, D.P., Wojcik, D.P. and Vander Meer, R.K
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  First observation of polygyny in fire ants, Soleno
psis spp., in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Psyche\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  96(3-4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  161-165\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  First observation of polygyny in fire ants, 
Solenopsis spp., in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Psyche (Cambridge)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1155/1989/78697\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsi
s quinquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; queens; physo
gastric queen; polygyny; colonies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A total of 16 polygynous colonies from eight si
tes in Buenos Aires Province were among 295 colonies of fire ants from 33 sites 
in Buenos Aires and Santa Fe provinces which we separated from the soil and exam
ined for pathogens and symbiotic arthropods.  Twelve of these were identified as
 S. richteri chromatotype I (Vander Meer, unpublished), and the remaining four a
s Solenopsis quinquecuspis Forel.  The 16 polygynous colonies yielded a total of
 116 inseminated queens.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Govern
ment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Jouvenaz_et_al-1989(M-2227).pdf   or   http://psyche.entclub.org/pd
f/96/96-161.pdf   or   http://psyche.entclub.org/pdf/96/96-161.pdf   or   http:/
/downloads.hindawi.com/journals/psyche/1989/078697.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18543\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  King, J.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Recommendations on the use of alcohols for preserv
ation of ant specimens (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  51(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1-6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  May 2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Recommendations on the use of alcohols for p
reservation of ant specimens (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00040-003-0709-x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Apr 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Camponotus floridanus; Dorymyr
mex bureni; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North Am
erica; USA; Florida; scientific; methods; ethanol; isopropanol; preservatives; i
sopropyl alcohol; chemical concentration; storage time; insect preservation; spe
cimen preservation; chemical preservation; preservation methods; DNA extraction;
 DNA; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Collectors use a variety of concentrations and 
types of alcohols to preserve ant specimens.  We evaluated existing literature, 
experimental evidence, and expert myrmecological advice to determine what kind a
nd concentration of alcohols will result in the best preserved specimens for car
d-point mounting and DNA extraction.  For our experimental evaluation, we killed
 and stored Solenopsis invicta, Camponotus floridanus, and Dorymyrmex bureni wor
kers in isopropanol and ethanol at four concentrations (70, 85, 95, 100%) over t
hree time periods (24 h, 1 month, 6 months).  We then compared specimen conditio
n and amenability to manipulation for mounting on card points.  Specimens stored
 in either 95% isopropanol or 95% ethanol for time periods longer than 24 hours 
produced the best specimens for mounting.  A literature review revealed that DNA
 is best preserved in 95 - 100% ethanol due to the ability of ethanol to more ra
pidly penetrate cellular membranes and deactivate DNase activity than other prim
ary alcohols.  We recommend that general collections of adult ant specimens shou
ld be killed and stored in 95% ethanol.  Following this recommendation will resu
lt in ant specimens that are easier to mount for museum collections and better p
reserved for molecular studies.  A variety of other killing and preservation tec
hniques relevant to the study of ants are also discussed.   (This article was wr
itten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is there
fore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 04; from-SDP; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r   http://hdl.handle.net/10113/3340   or   http://www.biology.ccsu.edu/kingjor/
2004KingPorterInsSoc.pdf   or   http://www.springerlink.com/content/qgawv0vawkxv
2enr/fulltext.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/pub
lications/King_and_Porter-2004(M-3886).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33624\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  King, J.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Evaluation of sampling methods and species richnes
s estimators for ants in upland ecosystems in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  34(6)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1566-1578\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Evaluation of sampling methods and species r
ichness estimators for ants in upland ecosystems in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0046-225X-34.6.1566\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Mar 06, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis i
nvicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; rarefactio
n; species occurrences; species richness; species richness estimation; structure
d inventory; sampling; pitfall traps; baits; leaf litter extraction; Berlese fun
nels; hand collecting; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The growing emphasis on including invertebrates
 in global biodiversity conservation efforts has prompted an increase in the stu
dy of invertebrate assemblages. Invertebrate sampling designs and the bias of in
dividual methods, nevertheless, remain poorly understood for a variety of habita
ts. We used a structured inventory approach to sampling ants in five upland ecos
ystems in Florida. We evaluated the efficiency of quantitative and nonquantitati
ve methods for sampling ants. We also evaluated the performance of four species 
richness estimators. A total of 3,774 species occurrences were distributed among
 1,732 samples that contained 94 species from 31 genera. Twenty unique species a
nd 10 duplicate species were collected. Compared with a comprehensive species li
st for Florida, sampling captured approximately equal to 66% of the regional fau
na and approximately equal to 70-90% of species within the ecosystems studied. C
ombinations of sampling methods were much more effective for assessing species r
ichness. Individual methods were complementary and sampled only part of the enti
re assemblage. Nonparametric estimators (an incidence-based coverage estimator [
ICE] and a jackknife estimator [Jack2]) performed better than lognormal fitting,
 and Michaelis-Menten curve extrapolation. However, none of the estimators was s
table, and their estimates should be viewed with skepticism. The results of this
 study provide support for the use of the Ants of the Leaf Litter (ALL) protocol
 for thoroughly sampling ant assemblages in temperate and subtropical ecosystems
. Furthermore, our results indicate that even in relatively species-poor (compar
ed with the tropics) temperate and subtropical regions, a large sampling effort 
that includes multiple sampling methods is the most effective manner of thorough
ly sampling an ant assemblage. Therefore, we suggest that structured inventory s
hould be adopted for a wider variety of terrestrial invertebrate studies.   (Thi
s article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official ti
me, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-4064.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/King_and_Porter-2005(M-4064).pdf}{\f1\fs28    or   ht
tp://www.biology.ccsu.edu/kingjor/2005KingandPorterEnvironEnt.pdf   or   http://
ddr.nal.usda.gov/bitstream/10113/901/1/IND43771258.pdf   or   http://king.cos.uc
f.edu/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/2005KingandPorterEnvironEnt.pdf   or   http://a
frsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/King_and_Porter-2005(M-
4064).pdf   or   http://ee.oxfordjournals.org/content/ee/34/6/1566.full.pdf   or
 pdf available through https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/34/6/1566/421930 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36717\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  King, J.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Body size, colony size, abundance, and ecological 
impact of exotic ants in Florida's upland ecosystems\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Evol. Ecol. Res.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  757-774\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Body size, colony size, abundance, and ecolo
gical impact of exotic ants in Florida's upland ecosystems\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Evolutionary Ecology Research\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-8, July 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Amblyopone pallipes; Aphaenoga
ster ashmeadi; Aphaenogaster flemingi; Aphaenogaster floridana; Aphaenogaster la
mellidens; Aphaenogaster treatae; Brachymyrmex depilis; Brachymyrmex nr. obscuri
or; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus castaneus; Camponotus discolor; Camponotus floridan
us; Camponotus impressus; Camponotus nearcticus; Camponotus socius; Cardiocondyl
a emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Cardiocondyla wroughtonii; Crematogaster ashmeadi;
 Crematogaster atkinsoni; Crematogaster lineolata; Crematogaster minutissima; Cy
phomyrmex minutus; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bossutus; Dorymyrmex bureni; 
Dorymyrmex elegans; Dorymyrmex grandulus; Dorymyrmex reginicula; Eurhopalothrix 
floridanus; Forelius pruinosus; Forelius; Formica archboldi; Formica pallidefulv
a; Formica schaufussi dolosa; Hypoponera inexorata; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypopo
nera opacior; Monomorium viride; Myrmecina americana; Neivamyrmex carolinensis; 
Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Neivamyrmex texanus; Odontomachus brunneus; Odontomachu
s relictus; Odontomachus ruginodus; Paratrechina arenivaga; Paratrechina concinn
a; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina parvula; Paratrechina phantasma; Parat
rechina wojciki; Pheidole adrianoi; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole dentigula; Pheido
le floridana; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Platyth
yrea punctata; Pogonomyrmex badius; Ponera exotica; Proceratium pergandei; Pseud
omyrmex ejectus, Pseudomyrmex elongatus, Pseudomyrmex gracilis, Pseudomyrmex pal
lidus; Pyramica bunki; Pyramica clypeata; Pyramica creightoni; Pyramica deyrupi;
 Pyramica dietrichi; Pyramica eggersi; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis globulari
a; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis nickersoni; Solenopsis pergandei; Solenopsis p
icta; Solenopsis nr. abdita; Solenopsis nr. carolinensis; Solenopsis tennesseens
is; Solenopsis tonsa; Strumigenys emmae; Strumigenys louisianae; Strumigenys rog
eri; Temnothorax bradleyi; Temnothorax palustris; Temnothorax pergandei; Temnoth
orax texanus; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Wasmannia au
ropunctata; Xenomyrmex floridanus; Amblyoponinae; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Fo
rmicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Proceratinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North A
merica; USA; Florida; scientific; worker; worker size; body size; colonies; colo
ny size; species diversity; population size; abundance; impact; ecological; upla
nd ecosystems; disturbed ecosystems; environmental impact; ecosystems; biologica
l invasion; invasive species; introduced species; native ants; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  With hundreds of species established in new loc
alities around the world, ants are an important, widely distributed, and growing
 group of exotic animals. The success of many established exotic ants is hypothe
sized to be related to competitive advantages associated with smaller workers an
d larger colonies relative to co-occurring native species. To evaluate this hypo
thesis, ant assemblages were thoroughly sampled across the range of upland ecosy
stems in north-central Florida, a region with one of the most diverse exotic ant
 faunae in the world. Patterns of species richness, abundance, worker body size,
 and colony size were compared among species and ecosystems. We found that exoti
c ants were neither abundant nor diverse in any of the undisturbed upland ecosys
tems. In disturbed field sites, exotic ants accounted for about 40% of total ant
 abundance and 25% of species richness. A total of 94 species, including 13 exot
ic species and 9 endemic species, were captured. The average body size of exotic
 ants was not obviously different from related native species. The average colon
y size of exotic ants was smaller than native species, with the exception of Sol
enopsis invicta which had the largest colony size of all species. Introduced ant
s (including S. invicta) were neither speciose nor abundant in any of the native
 woodland ecosystems. Florida's intact, native upland ecosystems appear to be re
sistant to invasion of exotic ant species despite the fact that surrounding dist
urbed habitats host a large diversity and abundance of introduced species. The p
rediction that exotic species have smaller workers than related native species w
as not supported.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government em
ployee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.evolutionary-ecology.com/sa
mple/ddar2004.pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   http://www.biology.ccsu.edu/kingjor/2007King
andPorterEER.pdf   or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publ
ications/King_and_Porter-2007(M-4231).pdf   or   http://king.cos.ucf.edu/wp-cont
ent/uploads/2011/08/2007KingandPorterEERhr.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp
2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/King_and_Porter-2007(M-4231).pdf   or   h
ttp://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=9156&content=PDF   or pdf avail
able through htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://hdl.handle.net/10113/9156 }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 16214\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Knapp, J.L. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Bure
n (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). A pest of Florida citrus and its management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Proceedings of the 7th International Citrus 
Congress of the International Society of Citriculture, Acireale, Italy. 3: 933-9
37\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invict
a Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). A pest of Florida citrus and its management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Brachy
myrmex obscurior; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Conomyrma bureni; Co
nomyrma medeis; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina faisonensis; Pheidole meta
llescens; Pheidole morrisi; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis
 invicta; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; s
cientific; impact; agricultural; citrus; chemical control; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Since the 1920's, ants have been reported as pe
sts of nonbearing Florida citrus. Results from chemical control trials were nega
tive due to a decline in ant populations in untreated areas following pesticide 
applications to treated plots and a wide variation in ants trapped between repli
cates of the same treatment.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Knapp_and_Wojcik-1992(M-2900).pdf }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 77017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Knutson, A., Bynum, E., Kerns, D., Porter, P., Bi
les, S. and Reed, B.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Managing insect and mite pests of Texas sorghum\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Texas A&M Agrilife Extension Service, Colleg
e Station, TX.  ENTO-085, 49 p.  Oct. 2018.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Managing insect and mite pests of Texas sorg
hum\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-94, Apr 22\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; extension; workers; seed predation; impact; agricul
tural; sorghum; damages; chemical control; cultural control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Early seedbed preparation before planting red
uces pest damage.  Recommended practices include planting healthy seed and prepa
ration of the seedbed to promote rapid germination to reduce the damage by fire 
ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren & wireworms to planted seeds.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 22; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  5.4 MB  https://extensionentomology.tamu.edu/files/2
019/02/Managing-Insect-and-Mite-Pests-of-Texas-Sorghum-ENTO-085-2018.pdf   or pd
f available through  https://extensionentomology.tamu.edu/resources/management-g
uides/sorghum/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 16445\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Korzukhin, M., Porter, S.D. and Thompson, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Improved red imported fire ant models.  [abstract]
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 16-20, In:  D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceed
ings of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gaine
sville, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Improved red imported fire ant models.  [abs
tract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; scientific; behavior; colonies; distribution; mathematical mode
ls; soil temperature; worker; longevity; range expansion; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The objectives of this presentation are to intr
oduce two versions of the red imported ant (Solenopsis invicta) [IFA] model deve
loped by Korzukhin and Porter (1994). The purposes of our modeling efforts are t
o improve the understanding of IFA biology, ecology & control.  The first model 
is an improved version of the one published in 1994 that described nest founding
, brood raiding, territory expansion, queen death, possible requeening and colon
y death. The improved model incorporates temperature dependent colony developmen
t, control strategies, and other modifications. Many adjustable parameters are i
ncluded (Table 1). The new model uses weekly mean soil temperature at 10 cm (Tab
le 2 shows worker longevity as a function of soil temperature), has a variable p
lot size (up to 1 hectare), and allows testing of discrete pesticide strategies 
(Table 3). Though improved, this updated model still has some of the limitations
 of the original, it models only monogyne colonies and an ideal, homogenous habi
tat. In the future, this model will be further adjusted to help with assessments
 of large-area management and biological control strategies. Figure 1 shows mode
led IFA densities for the cities listed, using local soil temperatures. Note tha
t the IFA is not expected to do well in some locales.  The second model is a sin
gle colony version developed to assess range expansion. Unlike several published
 models that tried to simulate this effect (Stoker et al. 1994, Killion and Gran
t. 1995), we tried to keep our model simple. Thus, we used a single colony syste
m that modeled colony size as a function of: 1) worker mortality, 2) queen fecun
dity and 3) colony growth, with all parameters being modified by hourly soil tem
perature. Table 4 shows the adjustable model parameters. To assess the possible 
northern range of IFA we used 10 cm depth, daily max-min soil temperature data f
rom 105 southern and western monitoring stations for the years 1973-1993 (Nation
al Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 1973-1993). Hourly temperatures were d
erived using a sine interpolation. We used the model to compare the capability o
f these monitoring stations to produce a colony that would replace itself (i.e.,
 produce one new queen). Results of our model runs showed that colony survival w
as strongly dependent upon colony growth in the first few months of existence an
d that small variations in soil temp caused sharp changes in colony growth. When
 our model compared possible colony replacement against soil temperature, a "lin
e" between the two isotherms shown in the distribution map in Vinson (1997) was 
produced. Additional modeling efforts will refine these results. Because altitud
e, aspect, slope, and vegetation cover have not been evaluated to see how these 
influence soil temperature, research will be conducted to assess these effects. 
 In the future, we will expand our temperature modeling by developing a temperat
ure profile of northern Arkansas using new soil temperature data, air to soil te
mperature conversion models and our Geographic Information System. We will also 
try to improve our current singlecolony- mortality model and then integrate it w
ith the temperature profile to develop an IFA riskrating system for Arkansas. Th
e risk-rating system can aid IFA impact assessment, and assist planning and impl
ementation of prevention andlor suppression strategies.   (This article was writ
ten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefo
re in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/15918   or in this 8.2 M
B file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Conference_Proceed
ings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 16444\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Korzukhin, M.D. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Spatial model of territorial competition and popul
ation dynamics in the fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  23(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  912-922\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Aug. 1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Spatial model of territorial competition and
 population dynamics in the fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae
)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/23.4.912\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; queen; requeening; growth; death; dis
tribution; intraspecific interactions; competition; territory; survivorship; ter
ritorial growth; brood raiding; colony founding; survival; queen death; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We developed a simulation model of monogyne fir
e ant populations which operates by  competitive interactions of individual colo
ny territories.  This model describes six major aspects of colony life history: 
nest founding, brood raiding, territory expansion, queen death, possible requeen
ing, and colony death.  Individual colony territories are represented by rectang
les, whose sides change independently depending upon the presence and size of ne
ighboring colonies.  Growing colonies try to occupy free space, while retaining 
square territorial dimensions whenever possible.  The growth of fire ant populat
ions in the model compared well with available field data.  The model predicted 
that competitive exclusion due caused by territorial interactions should occur w
hen areas reach 70-90% territory coverage.  Several computer experiments were co
nducted with the model to examine the importance of colony growth rate, brood ra
iding activity and other parameters on the relative success of sequentially foun
ding colony cohorts.  A one-week advantage in founding generally increased the l
ong-term survival of young colonies by 40-80%.  We also examined the factors aff
ecting average coverage of an area by colony territories.  Maximum coverage was 
achieved under a continuous influx of 50 queens/(ha-wk) or a single settlement o
f 1000 queens/ha; both values were much less than actual magnitudes of queen inf
lux observed in the field.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Govern
ment employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 94; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; verified-S
DP; from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2879
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.7 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Korzukhin_and_Porter-1994(M-2879).pdf   or 0.2 MB  https://w
ww.researchgate.net/profile/Robert-Johnson-49/publication/226314577_Soil_texture
_as_an_influence_on_distribution_of_the_desert_seed-havester_ants_Pogonomyrmex_r
ugus_and_Messor_pergandei/links/559d362108ae76bed0bb0856/Soil-texture-as-an-infl
uence-on-distribution-of-the-desert-seed-havester-ants-Pogonomyrmex-rugus-and-Me
ssor-pergandei.pdf   or 1.6 MB pdf available through https://academic.oup.com/ee
/article/23/4/912/411854 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 16443\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Korzukhin, M.D., Porter, S.D. and Thompson, L.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant population dynamics computer model.  [abs
tract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 1, In: J.P. Ellis [compiler], Proceedings
 of the 1993 Imported Fire Ant Conference, June 15-18, 1993, Charleston, South C
arolina, 141 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant population dynamics computer model.
  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1993_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3.6 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/7/74/1993_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 16446\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Korzukhin, M.D., Porter, S.D., Thompson, L.C. and
 Wiley, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling temperature-dependent range limits for th
e fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  30(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  645-655\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  August 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling temperature-dependent range limits 
for the fire ant Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the United Stat
es\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1603/0046-225X-30.4.645\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Arizona; Arkansas; California; Delaware; Kansas; Kentucky;
 Maryland; Missouri; Nevada; New Jersey; New Mexico; Oklahoma; Oregon; Tennessee
; Utah; Virginia; Washington; scientific; colony; reproduction; distribution; sp
read; soil temperature; air temperature; rain; dynamic model; prediction; alate 
production; range prediction; winter-kill; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We predict the future range of the fire ant Sol
enopsis invicta Buren within the United States based on climate and its current 
extreme distributions. To reach that goal, a dynamic model of colony growth with
 two time steps per day was formulated that operates by colony area, S, and alat
e production, a. Colony growth rate depended on daily maximum and minimum soil t
emperatures.  Temperature records at 4,537 meteorological stations within the cu
rrent (near 1.5 million km2) and potential range of S. invicta were obtained fro
m NOAA's National Climatic Data Center. At each station, a colony was allowed to
 grow and lifetime female alate production was calculated. Estimated alate produ
ction was then examined at current extremes of the fire ant distribution at sele
cted locations in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Oklahoma. Estimates from these locati
ons were used to define four zones of colony proliferation success: certain, pos
sible, undemonstrated, and improbable. An annual precipitation limit (510 mm) wa
s selected to indicate regions where arid conditions may prohibit growth in area
s without supplemental water sources. Results of the model predict that S. invic
ta will likely move 80-150 km north in Oklahoma and Arkansas. It will also likel
y continue expanding into portions of Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware in the ea
st and New Mexico, Arizona, California, Oregon, Nevada, and maybe even Washingto
n and Utah in the west.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from-DPW; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3616.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Korzukhin_et_al-2001(M-3616).pdf   or   https://www.researchgate.ne
t/profile/Sanford_Porter/publication/233596687_Modeling_Temperature-Dependent_Ra
nge_Limits_for_the_Fire_Ant_Solenopsis_invicta_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_in_the_Uni
ted_States/links/58459ae308aeda69681a5ad9/Modeling-Temperature-Dependent-Range-L
imits-for-the-Fire-Ant-Solenopsis-invicta-Hymenoptera-Formicidae-in-the-United-S
tates.pdf   or pdf available through html https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/30
/4/645/440552 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 17061\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Lanciani, C.A. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A high density of Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau (
Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) in fire ant foraging areas on a pond edge\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleop. Bull.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  45(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  278-279\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A high density of Martinezia dutertrei Chalu
meau (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) in fire ant foraging areas on a pond edge\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleopterists Bulletin\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; ecology; mound; population; habitat; 
symbiont; myrmecophile; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Martinezia dutertrei; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Levy_et_al-1974(M-2418).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 53376\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Lu, Y.Y., Porter, S.D. and Zeng, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2011\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  New traps for capturing Pseudacteon phorid flies, 
parasitoids of red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren.  [in Chinese, Eng
lish abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  33(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  90-94\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 15, 2011\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  New traps for capturing Pseudacteon phorid f
lies, parasitoids of red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren.  [in Chines
e, English abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.3969/j.issn.1674-0858.2011.01.017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; Asia; China; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteo
n; biocontrol; methods; survelliance; trap; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Three new types of traps for capturing the Pseu
dacteon phorid flies, parasitoids of red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Bu
ren, in fields were designed after experiments and tests in this paper. The tech
nical points of trap construction and set were presented. The traps were proved 
to be attractive and effective after they were evaluated in capturing Pseudacteo
n phorid flies in fields.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gover
nment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited from: http://www.cqvip.com/qk/94519
a/201101/37108781.html \par }
{\f1\fs28 Also cited from: http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-KCTD201101
019.htm\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Translated Title:}{\f1\fs28  Alternate citation: Lu, et al., 2011, N
ew traps for capturing Pseudacteon phorid flies, parasitoids of red imported fir
e ant Solenopsis invicta Buren, Natural Enemies of Insects 33(1): 90-94.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18731\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  MacKay, W.P., Porter, S., Fowler, H.G. and Vinson
, S.B.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A distribu\u231?\u227?o das formigas lava-p\u233?s
 (Solenopsis spp.) no Estado de Mato Grosso do Sul, Brasil (Hymenoptera: Formici
dae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  24(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  307-317\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: 1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A distribu\u231?\u227?o das formigas lava-p\u233
?s (Solenopsis spp.) no Estado de Mato Grosso do Sul, Brasil (Hymenoptera: Formi
cidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 pusillignis; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis substituta; Myrmicinae; South Am
erica; Brazil; scientific; key; distribution; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We studied the distributions of four species of
 fire ants, Solenopsis spp., in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.  This a
rea is the possible homeland of Solenopsis invicta Buren, the imported fire ant 
of the United States.  S. invicta is the most common and widely distributed spec
ies in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul.  S. pusillignis Trager is uncommon and w
as collected at only nine localities.  S. saevissima (F. Smith) is not common an
d was collected at only two sites.  Finally S. substituta Santschi was rarely co
llected (four localities), but is widely distributed in Mato Grosso do Sul.  Fir
e ants are uncommon in the great Pantanal swamp of the state, and are much more 
common and widely distributed in dryer, disturbed sites.  Densities of fire ants
 are much lower in Mato Grosso do Sul than they are in the United States.  In ad
dition they occur at fewer sites, have smaller mounds and constitute a smaller f
raction of the local ant community in Brazil.  These data are consistent with th
ey hypothesis that North American populations of fire ants have escaped natural 
biological controls.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 95; from SDP, verified-TEK; from Fi
re Ant Literature Database; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; verified-DPW; from ANTBIB; Rec'
d UCB BioSci. 27 Jan. 1995, verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/60360510/publi
cations/MacKay_et_al-1994(M-9999).pdf   or pdf available through https://www.res
earchgate.net/publication/273771179_A_distribuicao_das_formigas_lava-pes_Solenop
sis_spp_no_Estado_de_Mato_Grosso_do_Sul_Hymenoptgera_Formicidae \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Translated Title:}{\f1\fs28  = Distribution of fire ants (Solenopsis
 spp.) in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil (Hymenoptera: Formicidae).\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18714\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  MacKay, W.P., Porter, S.D., Gonzalez, D., Rodrigu
ez, A., Armendedo, H., Rebeles, A. and Vinson, S.B.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A comparison of monogyne and polygyne populations 
of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), in Mexi
co\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Kansas Entomol. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  63(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  611-615\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A comparison of monogyne and polygyne popula
tions of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), i
n Mexico\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of the Kansas Entomological So
ciety\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta mexicana; Camponotus; Con
omyrma; Crematogaster; Forelius; Gnamptogenys tornata; Monomorium; Neivamyrmex; 
Odontomachus; Pachycondyla harpax; Pheidole; Pseudomyrmex ferrugineus; Pseudomyr
mex gracilis; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis globul
aria; Solenopsis invicta; Tetramorium spinosus; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Ecta
tomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North Ame
rica; Mexico; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; polydomy; ecology; dis
tribution; population; mound; nest; density; worker size; allometry; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We compared monogyne (single queen per nest) an
d polygyne (multiple functional queens per nest) populations of the tropical fir
e ant in Mexico.  We collected up to 16 queens in nests of the polygyne populati
on.  Workers from polygyne nests were considerably smaller and lighter in color 
than workers from monogyne nests.  Nest density was extremely high in the polygy
ne population (over 2500 occupied nests and over 6000 unoccupied nests per ha). 
 These differences are similar to those found in the monogyne and polygyne popul
ations of the imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta in the United States.  (abstr
act provided by author)        *[Polygyny in S. invicta is spreading in Texas; p
ersonal observation.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibli
ography; from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M
-2427.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/MacKay_et_al-1991(M-2427).pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cm
ave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18763\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Macom, T.E. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Food and energy requirements of laboratory fire an
t colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  24(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  387-391\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Food and energy requirements of laboratory f
ire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/24.2.387\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; diet; polygyny; colony; growth; physi
ology; caloric intake; biomass; collection; growth; bioenergetics; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This study was designed to determine how much f
ood is needed to sustain colonies of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren.  Thi
rty laboratory colonies were fed 1, 2, or 4 crickets per day.  Half were given a
ccess to unlimited sugar water.  Colony biomass, cricket collection, and sugar c
ollection were monitored weekly until each colony stopped growing.  Caloric inta
ke was strongly correlated with and directly proportional to colony biomass (liv
e weight) over an 8-fold range (2-16 g).  Colonies needed \u8776? 1.14 +- 0.29 (
Standard deviation) Kcal of food per gram of colony per week to sustain themselv
es.  The presence of sugar decreased the amount of cricket biomass collected (dr
y weight) from 0.186 g/g of colony per week for colonies receiving crickets to 0
.106 g/g of colony per week for colonies receiving both sugar water and crickets
.  Colonies fed only crickets approximately doubled their final size with the do
ubling of cricket availability; whereas, colonies receiving both crickets and su
gar increased to a lesser extent.  The laboratory food collection rates in this 
study suggest that a field population of fire ants with 90 mature mounds per hec
tare would require \u8776? 21,000 Kcal or 16.0 kg of insects and sugar (combined
 wet weight) per week in the summer.  (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 95; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from SDP; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2930.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Macom_and_Porter-1995(M-2930).pdf   or pdf available through  https
://academic.oup.com/ee/article/24/2/387/423264 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 18764\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Macom, T.E. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of polygyne and monogyne red imported f
ire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) population densities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  89(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  535-543\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of polygyne and monogyne red impo
rted fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) population densities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/89.4.535\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony size; polygyny; monogyny; phys
iology; respiration; metabolism; biomass; standing caloric energy; population; m
ound density; nest; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Polygyne or multiple-queen colonies of the red 
imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, are reported to be a substantially greater 
environmental and economic problem than monogyne or single-queen fire ants becau
se of much higher population densities associated with polygyny.  This study com
pared population densities of polygyne and monogyne fire ants using measures of 
mound density, worker number, ant biomass, metabolic consumption and standing ca
loric energy of ant biomass.  We began the experiment by counting and measuring 
mounds at 14 polygyne and 14 monogyne sites located within a 35-km radius of Gai
nesville, Florida.  Average mound densities were 3.03times larger at polygyne si
tes than at monogyne sites (470 verses 155 mounds/ha).  To adjust for difference
s in mound size, 22 monogyne and 21 polygyne mounds of various sizes were excava
ted from 16 of the experimental sites.  Colony size and biomass were regressed o
n mound volume.  These regressions were then used to estimate colony size and co
lony biomass from the mound volumes measured at the 28 field sites.  The estimat
ed colony sizes and colony biomasses at each site were summed and used to estima
te field population densities.  Polygyne populations contained 1.94 times more w
orkers per unit area (35 million versus 18 million workers/ha) and 1.86 times mo
re biomass (27.7 versus 14.9 kg wet weight/ha) than monogyne populations.  Energ
y usage and standing energy of the ants per hectare were respectively 2.30 times
 and 1.90 times higher in polygyne populations.  Overall, This study indicates t
hat polygyne population densities are about two times larger on average than mon
ogyne population densities.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gover
nment employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3028.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.8 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/Macom_and_Porter-1996(M-3028).pdf   or 1.1 MB pdf available
 through  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/89/4/535/62788 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47552\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Merchant, M.E., Porter, M.M. and Russell, A.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Texas statewide phone survey on Fire ant impact an
d control measures used by consumers\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 192-195, In: S.B. Vinson, S. Ellison, & D
. Bush [compiliers], Proceedings of the Southwestern ESA Branch Fire Ant Symposi
a and the 2001 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, Feb. 28-March 2, 2001, San
 Antonio, Texas, 260 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Texas statewide phone survey on Fire ant imp
act and control measures used by consumers\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; extension; impact; medical; sting; urban; chemical 
control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[A statewide telephone survey of 1000 Texans c
onducted in February, 2000 included questions about IFA impact & control measure
s used by consumers.  Seventy-nine% (+-3%) of Texans reported that they or a fam
ily member have been stung at some time by fire ants.  Fifty-six%, of Texans tre
ated for fire ants last year.  Of those attempting control, 51% (+-4.1%) reporti
ng applying 4 or more treatments in the past year.  Only 24% of respondents used
 broadcast baits to control fire ants.  The most common method of control (65%) 
was application of an insecticide directly to a fire ant mound.  Only 17% of res
pondents felt that water pollution from the application of fire ant insecticides
 was a serious pollution problem in their community.  Most Texans (87%) remain u
naware of the Texas Two-Step Method for fire ant control.  However 3% of respond
ents indicated they were very familiar with this control method.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 16.6 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/4/44/2001_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 51635\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Merchant, M.E., Russell, S.A. and Porter, R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Educating the public about fire ant control: a fir
e ant campaign in Dallas, Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 70-71, In: Proceedings of the 2000 Nation
al Conference on Urban Entomology, 14-16 May, 2000, Fort Lauderdale, Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Educating the public about fire ant control:
 a fire ant campaign in Dallas, Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-27, Jan 12; IN: 2000 Proc. National Conference
 on Urban Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; impact; urban; chemical control; IPM pr
ogram; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 2.3 MB file }{\f1\fs28\ul http://ncue.tamu.e
du/proceedings/pdf/2000proceedings.pdf}{\f1\fs28  \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32545\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W., Korzukhin, M.D. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Predicted range expansion of the invasive fire ant
, Solenopsis invicta,in the eastern United States based on the VEMAP global warm
ing scenario\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Divers. Distrib.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  199-204\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  May 2005; online 29 March 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Predicted range expansion of the invasive fi
re ant, Solenopsis invicta,in the eastern United States based on the VEMAP globa
l warming scenario\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Diversity and Distributions\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1366-9516.2005.00142.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Feb 05, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Delaware; Florida;
 Georgia; Kansas; Kentucky; Louisiana; Maryland; Missouri; Mississippi; North Ca
rolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; Virginia; scientific; colony
; temperature; climate change; range expansion; invasive species; VEMAP global w
arming scenario; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta B
uren, is an invasive pest from South America that currently occupies much of the
 south-eastern USA. Global warming is likely to allow range expansion of many in
vasive species, including S. invicta. We used a dynamic, ecophysiological model 
of fire ant colony growth coupled with models simulating climate change to predi
ct the potential range expansion of S. invicta in the eastern USA over the next 
century. The climate change scenario predicted by the Vegetation-Ecosystem Model
ling and Analysis Project (VEMAP) was used in our analyses. Our predictions indi
cate that the habitable area for S. invicta may increase by c. 5% over the next 
40-50 years (a northward expansion of 33 +- 35 km). As the pace of global warmin
g is expected to quicken in the latter half of the century, however, the habitab
le area for S. invicta in 2100 is predicted to be > 21% greater than it currentl
y is (a northward expansion of 133 +- 68 km). Because the black imported fire an
t, S. richteri Forel, occupies higher latitudes than S. invicta, the overall are
a of the eastern USA infested with invasive Solenopsis species could be greater 
than that estimated here.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gover
nment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-LWM; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3988.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L/LloydMorrison
/PDF%20files/Div.Distr.(05)11;199-204.pdf   or   https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUse
rFiles/60360510/publications/Morrison_et_al-2005(M-3988).pdf   or   https://onli
nelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1366-9516.2005.00142.x   or pdf available 
through  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227547566_Predicted_range_expa
nsion_of_the_invasive_fire_ant_Solenopsis_invicta_in_the_eastern_United_States_b
ased_on_the_VEMAP_global_warming_scenario   or html  https://onlinelibrary.wiley
.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1366-9516.2005.00142.x \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32540\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Positive association between densities of the red 
imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, and generalized ant and arthropod diversi
ty\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  32(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  548-554\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Positive association between densities of th
e red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, and generalized ant and arthropod d
iversity\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0046-225X-32.3.548\par }
{\f1\fs28\b PMCID:}{\f1\fs28  3805\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster flemingi; Aphaen
ogaster floridana; Brachymyrmex cf. obscurior; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus 
floridanus; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; Cardiocondyla venustula; C
ardiocondyla wroughtoni; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrm
ex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex smithi; Formica pallidefulva; Formica 
dolosa; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera punctatissima; Odontomachus brunneus; P
aratrechina; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Phe
idole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole tysoni; Prenolepis imparis; Pyramica e
ggersi; Pyramica membranifera; Solenopsis cf. abdita; Solenopsis cf. carolinensi
s; Solenopsis cf. pergandei; Solenopsis cf. picta; Solenopsis cf. tennesseensis;
 Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichod
erinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; Florida; 
scientific; monogyny; nests; mound area; temperature; humidity; communities; spe
cies density; species diversity; species richness; species abundance; foraging a
ctivity; pitfall traps; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The invasive ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, is 
a threat to native arthropod biodiversity. We compared areas with naturally vary
ing densities of mostly monogyne S. invicta and examined the association of S. i
nvicta density with three diversity variables: (1) the species richness of ants,
 (2) the species richness of non-ant arthropods, and (3) the abundance of non-S.
 invicta ants. Pitfall traps were used to quantify S. invicta density and the th
ree diversity variables; measurement of mound areas provided a complementary mea
sure of S. invicta density. We sampled 45 sites of similar habitat in north cent
ral Florida in both the spring and autumn of 2000. We used partial correlations 
to elucidate the association between S. invicta density and the three diversity 
variables, extracting the effects of temperature and humidity on foraging activi
ty. Surprisingly, we found moderate positive correlations between S. invicta den
sity and species richness of both ants and non-ant arthropods. Weaker, but usual
ly positive, correlations were found between S. invicta density and the abundanc
e of non-S. invicta ants. A total of 37 ant species, representing 16 genera, wer
e found to coexist with S. invicta over the 45 sites. These results suggest that
 S. invicta densities as well as the diversities of other ants and arthropods ar
e regulated by common factors (e.g., productivity). Many invaded communities may
 be more resistant to S. invicta than generally believed, or possess an unexpect
ed resilience for recovery if S. invicta can be permanently suppressed.   (This 
article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time
, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 02; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Morrison_and_Porter-2003(M-3805).pdf   or pdf available through htm
l https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/32/3/548/389541 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 45955\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies as classical biological control agent
s of imported fire ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  VanDriesche, R.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Proceedings of the 1st International Symposiu
m on Biological Control of Arthropods, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 14-18, 200
2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Morgantown, West Virginia, 573 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA Forest Service FHTET-03-05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  497\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies as classical biological control
 agents of imported fire ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Jan 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Jan 10, IN: 2003 1st International Symp. B
iological Control of Arthropods\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; behav
ior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspi
s; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are solit
ary parasitoids of ants. Development occurs inside the head capsule of the host 
worker, killing the ant in the process. Pseudacteon flies may also have relative
ly large indirect effects on colony-level foraging and interspecific competition
, as the presence of a single phorid can modify the behavior of hundreds of work
ers. Two Solenopsis fire ant species from South America, Solenopsis invicta Bure
n and Solenopsis richteri Forel, are serious pests in their introduced range in 
the United States. The high population densities of these two exotic ants may be
 due in part to an escape from natural enemies. Pseudacteon phorid flies from So
uth America are being evaluated as classical biological control agents of import
ed fire ants in North America. Laboratory studies of one Pseudacteon species, Ps
eudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, and its interactions with S. invicta, revealed th
at the presence of this phorid decreased food retrieval by as much as 50%. We ha
ve imported select Pseudacteon species from Brazil and Argentina to the United S
tates for laboratory evaluation, and are currently mass-rearing and releasing tw
o species, P. tricuspis and Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier at multiple sites in 
the southeastern United States. In northern Florida, we established the first fi
eld population of P. tricuspis in October 1997. This species now covers approxim
ately 8,100 square kilometers in Florida, and is continuing to expand its range 
and increase in abundance. Longterm monitoring of sites with and without flies w
ill elucidate the magnitude of the effect of these parasitoids on target fire an
t and associated arthropod populations. Pseudacteon flies and other natural enem
ies will not eradicate imported fire ants in North America, but may reduce fire 
ant densities.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 1.6 MB file  http://www.bugwood.org/arthropo
d/poster.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32543\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phenology and parasitism rates in introduced popul
ations of Pseudacteon tricuspis, a parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  50(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  127-141\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  February 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phenology and parasitism rates in introduced
 populations of Pseudacteon tricuspis, a parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl (Dordrecht)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10526-004-0551-8\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Jun 06, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; colonies; colony size; popu
lations; mound; mound area; foraging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Dipter
a; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; phenology; parasitism rates; introduced popu
lations; population density; seasonal variation; seasonal abundance; parasitoid 
density; parasitoid abundance; sex ratio; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We documented patterns of seasonal abundance an
d rates of parasitism in introduced populations of Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmei
er, a phorid parasitoid of the red  imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren.
 Adult P. tricuspis populations were censused at monthly intervals for 1 year at
 three sites in northern Florida. Censuses were conducted by aspirating phorids 
attracted to disturbed S. invicta mounds. Pseudacteon tricuspis adults were pres
ent in every month at all sites, although abundances varied greatly among sites 
and over time. The highest densities of flies (up to 453 censused at 10 disturbe
d S. invicta mounds in 30 min) were observed in November, and changes in abundan
ce over time were positively correlated among sites. Sex ratios were usually mal
e biased. Parasitism rates were evaluated by collecting workers from field colon
ies and monitoring them in the laboratory for evidence of parasitism. Parasitism
 rates were very low - always less than 1%. The average parasitism rate per colo
ny over 16 colonies and 2 years was 0.058%. No pupariation occurred within the f
irst 8 days of collection, suggesting parasitism by P. tricuspis induced behavio
ral changes in parasitized workers that precluded such workers from our collecti
ons. If so, true field parasitism rates may be several times higher than measure
d here, yet still low in an absolute sense. These low parasitism rates can be re
conciled with observed adult phorid densities by considering the large number of
 host ants present at the study sites.   (This article was written and prepared 
by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public 
domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3989.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=33
46&content=PDF  or   http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L/LloydMorrison/PDF%20
files/BioControl(05)50;127-141.pdf   or   http://www.springerlink.com/content/l5
j51x78721532tn/fulltext.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Morrison_and_Porter-2005(M-3989).pdf   or pdf available thro
ugh http://hdl.handle.net/10113/3346   or pdf available through http://www.ars.u
sda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32544\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Testing for population-level impacts of introduced
 Pseudacteon tricuspis flies, phorid parasitoids of Solenopsis invicta fire ants
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  33(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  9-19\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Testing for population-level impacts of intr
oduced Pseudacteon tricuspis flies, phorid parasitoids of Solenopsis invicta fir
e ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control: theory and applica
tion in pest management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2005.01.004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Nov 05, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; seasonal variation; temporal 
variation; mounds; population; population dynamics; population density; populati
on-level impacts; seasonal abundance; species abundance; symbiont; myrmecophile;
 parasitoid; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; parasitism; parasitism
 pressure; pest monitoring; sampling; mound counts; hot dog baits; pitfall traps
; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoid phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteo
n are potential biocontrol agents of invasive Solenopsis fire ants in the US. On
e Pseudacteon species, P. tricuspis Borgmeier, has been released and is now esta
blished over a large region of north central Florida. We conducted a multi-year,
 large-scale field experiment to investigate potential population-level impacts 
on host Solenopsis invicta Buren fire ants and associated arthropods. We establi
shed and monitored 67 field sites over a 3.5 year period, documenting S. invicta
 density and activity by three complementary sampling methods: (1) mound counts 
and measurements, (2) attraction to baits, and (3) pitfall trap catches. P. tric
uspis abundance was determined by censusing flies at disturbed S. invicta mounds
. P. tricuspis populations increased in abundance over the first two years follo
wing colonization and then oscillated seasonally, reaching higher abundances in 
the fall than in the preceding spring. S. invicta populations varied greatly ove
r time, and repeated-measures ANCOVA revealed no effect of phorid parasitism pre
ssure on S. invicta density or activity. P. tricuspis likely has a relatively sm
all effect on S. invicta populations, which may not be consistent over space and
 time and is difficult to document against the background of high variability in
 fire ant populations due to various environmental factors (i.e., rainfall, dist
urbance). P. tricuspis parasitism pressure (averaged over the course of the expe
riment) was positively associated with changes in S. invicta density. Additional
ly, P. tricuspis abundance was positively correlated with S. invicta density aft
er P. tricuspis populations had been established for >1 year. Introduced phorid 
populations may require many years before a measurable impact is apparent. Alter
natively, parasitism pressure of a single phorid species may not be a major fact
or regulating fire ant populations.   (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-LWM; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3985.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=1729&content=PDF   or   http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L/LloydMorris
on/PDF%20files/Biol.Control(05)33;9-19.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Use
rFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Morrison_and_Porter-2005(M-3985).pdf   or   h
ttps://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/37fb/6e323d7f2f8061cd153f7af489bcaf91f110.pdf   
or   http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.542.4377&rep=rep1&
type=pdf   or   pdf available through https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/ca
talog.xhtml?id=1729&start=0&searchText=Morrison&searchField=&sortField=   or pdf
 available through http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32542\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Post-release host-specificity testing of Pseudacte
on tricuspis, a phorid parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  51(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  195-205\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Post-release host-specificity testing of Pse
udacteon tricuspis, a phorid parasitoid of Solenopsis invicta fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl (Dordrecht)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10526-004-4655-y\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 06; PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster nr. carolinensis
; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Camponotus floridanus; Crematogaster minutissima; Crem
atogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Forelius pruinosus; Li
nepithema humile; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata; Pogonomyrmex badius; 
Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex sep
tentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudom
yrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; temperature; mound; mound de
nsities; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tric
uspis; host specificity; host acceptance; biocontrol; nontarget organisms; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Inherent in any biological control program is t
he risk of nontarget effects. Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, a parasitoid phor
id fly, has been introduced to the United States from South America as a potenti
al biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren. We c
onducted tests of host specificity on introduced populations of P. tricuspis, wh
ich are attracted to alarm pheromones released by their hosts during events such
 as mound disturbances and interspecific interactions. We monitored disturbed mo
unds of S. invicta and its close congener, S. geminata (F.), during the expansio
n of P. tricuspis across north Florida and after populations had been establishe
d for approximately 3 years. We also tested host acceptance in established popul
ations of P. tricuspis by offering trays containing S. invicta, S. geminata, and
 14 additional ant species representing 12 different non-Solenopsis genera. Alth
ough P. tricuspis was commonly observed to hover over and attempt to oviposit on
 S. invicta, we never observed any parasitization attempts on any other ant spec
ies. As predicted by laboratory tests, released populations of P. tricuspis appe
ar to be highly host specific and pose no obvious threat to nontarget species.  
 (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offici
al time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[In table 1, uses Myr
mecinae instead of Myrmicinae.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from-SDP; from NAL's AGRICOLA; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-4094.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=3347&content=PDF   or   http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L/LloydMorris
on/PDF%20files/BioControl(06)51;195-205.pdf   or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2Us
erFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Vazquez_et_al-2006(M-4095).pdf   or   http:/
/people.missouristate.edu/LloydMorrison/PDF%20files/Host%20spec%20proof.pdf   or
   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Morrison_and
_Porter-2006(M-4094).pdf   or pdf available through http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/
cmave/ifahi-publications   or pdf available through https://naldc-legacy.nal.usd
a.gov/naldc/catalog.xhtml?id=3347&start=0&searchText=Morrison&searchField=&sortF
ield= \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48153\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W., Porter, S.D., Daniels, E. and Kor
zukhin, M.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential global range expansion of the invasive f
ire ant, Solenopsis invicta.  [poster paper]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 115, In: L. Greenberg & C. Lerner [ed.], 
Proceedings of the 2003 Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 30-April 1, 2003
, Palm Springs, CA, 145 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential global range expansion of the inva
sive fire ant, Solenopsis invicta.  [poster paper]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2003_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; global range expansion; invasive
 species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 21 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/0/03/2003_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32541\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W., Porter, S.D., Daniels, E. and Kor
zukhin, M.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential global range expansion of the invasive f
ire ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Invasions\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  6(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  183-191\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June, 2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential global range expansion of the inva
sive fire ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Invasions\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:BINV.0000022135.96042.90
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b PMCID:}{\f1\fs28  9999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-7, June 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; Africa; Asia; Australia; Oceania; New Zealand; Europe; No
rth America; South America; scientific; colony alate production; temperature; di
stribution; global range expansion; invasion; modeling; invasive species; quaran
tine; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta B
uren, is an invasive pest that has become widespread in the southern United Stat
es and Caribbean after introduction from South America in the 1930s. This specie
s, which has diverse detrimental impacts on recipient communities, was recently 
discovered in Australia and New Zealand and has the potential to colonize numero
us other regions. We used a dynamic, ecophysiological model of colony growth to 
predict the potential global range expansion of this invasive species. Based on 
minimum and maximum daily temperatures, the model estimates colony alate product
ion and predicts future geographic range limits. Because S. invicta populations 
are limited by arid conditions as well as cold temperatures, we superimposed pre
cipitation data upon temperature-based predictions, to identify regions that do 
not receive enough rainfall to support this species across the landscape. Many a
reas around the globe, including large portions of Europe, Asia, Africa, Austral
ia, and numerous island nations, are at risk for S. invicta infestation. Quarant
ine officials should be vigilant for any accidental introductions of this pest i
n susceptible regions. Costs of eradication increase dramatically as the area of
 infestation grows, and large infestations may be impossible to eradicate. Other
 South American Solenopsis fire ants (e.g., S. richteri Forel) may become invasi
ve if the opportunity arises.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. G
overnment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L
/LloydMorrison/PDF%20files/Biol.Invasions(04)6;183-191.pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   htt
p://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=3079&content=PDF   or   http://ww
w.springerlink.com/content/m647505x53u65852/fulltext.pdf   or   http://www.ars.u
sda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Morrison_et_al-2004(M-3880).pdf
   or   http://herman.marc.usda.gov/sites/fireants/publications/BI6_183.pdf   or
   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Morrison_et_
al-2004(M-3880).pdf   or pdf available through htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://hdl.handle.n
et/10113/3079 }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 20623\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W., Porter, S.D. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Sex ratio variation as as function of host size in
 Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae), parasitoids of Solenopsis fire ants (Hym
enoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. J. Linn. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  66(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  257-267\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  February 1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Sex ratio variation as as function of host s
ize in Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae), parasitoids of Solenopsis fire ant
s (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Journal of the Linnean Soci
ety\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1111/j.1095-8312.1999.tb01887.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 saevissima; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; South America; Brazil; scien
tific; colony; head capsule; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasit
oid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol
; environmental sex determination; sex allocation; host size; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Some Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) flies are 
parasitoids of Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) ant workers in North and Sou
th America.  Laboratory studies of sex allocation revealed a pattern of sex rati
o variation as a function of host size, with more females arising from larger ho
sts.  Environmental sex determination is a possible mechanism for the observed p
attern, and examination of Pseudacteon life history reveals several traits assum
ed to be important in models predicting conditions under which environmental sex
 determination is favoured.  Sex allocation patterns of Pseudacteon are compared
 with theoretical predictions and empirical data from better-studied hymenoptera
n parasitoids that have hoplodiploid sex determination.  The pattern of sex rati
o variation observed has importan implications for biocontrol efforts of importe
d Solenopsis fire ants by the introduction of Pseudacteon parasitoids.   (This a
rticle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time,
 and is therefore in the public domain.)             *[Larger host produced larg
er flies, with more females emerging from larger hosts]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; from-SDP; verified-SDP, USDA-CM
AVE M-3358.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Morrison_et_al-1999(M-3353).pdf   or pdf available through  https:/
/antcat.org/references/144138 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 55088\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Morrison, L.W., Porter, S.D. and Nogueira de S\u225
?, L.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Classical biological control of imported fire ants
 by parasitoid flies.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  In: XXI International Congress of Entomology
, Abstracts, Foz do Igua\u231?u, Brazil, 20-26 August 2000, Vol. 1, p. 402\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Classical biological control of imported fir
e ants by parasitoid flies.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-31, Jan 13; IN: 2000 vol.1 XXI Int. Congr. Ent
omol. Brazil Ses.08Entophag&BioCon\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Brazil; scien
tific; nest; mound; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phori
dae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; quarantine; introduced spec
ies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are solit
ary parasitoids of ants. Development occurs inside the head capsule of the host 
worker, killing the ant in the process. Pseudacteon flies may also have relative
ly large indirect effects on colony-level foraging and interspecific competition
, as the presence of a single phorid can modify the behavior of hundreds of work
ers. Two Solenopsis fire ant species, S. invicta and , have been introduced into
 the United States from South America and are serious pests in their introduced 
range. The high population densities of these two exotic ants may be due in part
 to an escape from natural enemies. Pseudacteon phorid flies from South America 
have the potential to be used as classical biological control agents of imported
 fire ants in North America. Laboratory studies of one Pseudacteon species, P. t
ricuspis, and its interactions with S. invicta, revealed that the presence of th
is phorid decreased food retrieval by as much as 50%. The primary mechanism of t
his effect was a significant decrease in worker activity when phorids were prese
nt. The presence of phorids did not significantly affect interspecific interacti
ons between S. invicta and its close congener, S. geminata. The overall effect o
f introduced Pseudacteon phorids on imported Solenopsis fire ants in the United 
States will be evaluated from field releases of the flies and monitoring of targ
et ant and associated arthropod communities. We have exported select Pseudacteon
 species from the Brazilian Quarantine Laboratory at Embrapa Environment, Jaguar
i\u250?na, S\u227?o Paulo State, Brazil to the United States for laboratory eval
uation and field release, as part of a cooperative program between Embrapa and t
he USDA-ARS. In northern Florida, we had established 5 field populations of Pseu
dacteon tricuspis by the end of 1999. One population has been in existence since
 October 1997. The introduced populations are increasing in abundance and expand
ing in size, with the largest population covering an area of almost 100 square k
ilometers. Adult P. tricuspis were found to be active in the release areas in ev
ery month of the year. Long term monitoring of release and control sites should 
elucidate the magnitude of the effect of these parasitoids on target fire ant an
d associated arthropod populations. Pseudacteon flies and other natural enemies 
will not eradicate imported fire ants in North America, but could reduce fire an
t populations to lower densities.  (This article was written and prepared by U.S
. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain
.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 13; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 2 MB file http://www.seb.org.br/eventos/CBE/
XVIIICBE/SESSIONS/SESSION8.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 21183\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Nogueira de S\u225?, L.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Decapitating flies (Phoridae: Diptera) collected i
n the Jaguari\u250?na area for fire ant biocontrol in the USA.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Anais: Sess\u245?es de P\u244?steres, p. 51,
 Anais do VI SICONBIOL, 6 Simp\u243?sio de Controle Biol\u243?gico, 24-28 Maio 1
998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Decapitating flies (Phoridae: Diptera) colle
cted in the Jaguari\u250?na area for fire ant biocontrol in the USA.  [abstract]
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Aug 03\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasit
e; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteo
n litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; 
Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Nogueirade_Sa_and_Porter-1998(M-3298).pdf }{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62157\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D., Porter, S.D. and Valles, S.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A review of the biological control of fire ants (H
ymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Myrmecol. News\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  101-116\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2015; online 26 June 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A review of the biological control of fire a
nts (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Myrmecological News\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-75, Apr 20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; p
athogen; microsporidium; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus
-3; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The suppression of established invasive ants wi
ll likely require biological control by natural enemies. This approach is self-s
ustaining and can impact undetected or inaccessible populations that are a sourc
e of the continual presence and expansion of the invaders. There is an ongoing e
ffort to introduce and distribute biological control agents against fire ants, S
olenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 and Solenopsis richteri Forel, 1909, in the USA. E
ight natural enemies, consisting of two pathogens, a microsporidium, Kneallhazia
 solenopsae, and a virus, Solenopsis invicta virus-3, plus six species of parasi
toid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are now established (i.e., reproducing in th
e field). These biological control agents are host specific and negatively impac
t fire ants to varying degrees. Fire ant populations in the presence of biologic
al control agents are often reduced (based on number of ants per nest), but the 
number of nests may not decline. It remains to be seen if the continued release 
and establishment of a suite of biological control agents can result in the comp
lete control of fire ants. The currently established biocontrol agents are actin
g as expected by weakening fire ant colonies, and contributing to the potential 
cumulative attrition of colony vigor. Knowledge gained from establishing and dis
seminating biological control agents of fire ants in the USA will allow for fast
er progress in the utilization of biological control for fire ants in other regi
ons of the world as well as providing guidance for the importation and establish
ment of natural enemies for other invasive ants.  (This article was written and 
prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in th
e public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW;\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB  https://www.myrmecologicalnews.org/cms/index
.php?option=com_download&view=download&filename=volume21/mn21_101-116_printable.
pdf&format=raw   or 1.1 MB pdf available through https://www.myrmecologicalnews.
org/cms/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&id=619&Itemid=365 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 52667\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D., Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M. and Briano, J.
A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Vairimorpha invictae not detected in the parasitic
 fly, Pseudacteon obtusus, reared from the microsporidium-infected  fire ants, S
olenopsis invicta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  41st Annual Meeting of the Society for Inver
tebrate Pathology, August 3-7, 2008, p. 96.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Vairimorpha invictae not detected in the par
asitic fly, Pseudacteon obtusus, reared from the microsporidium-infected  fire a
nts, Solenopsis invicta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-28, Mar 12; IN: 2008 41st-Annual Meet. Soc. In
vertebrate Pathol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Argentina; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasi
toid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The microsporidium Vairimorpha invictae and par
asitic flies in the genus Pseudacteon have established or are being considered f
or release in the USA for the biological control of fire ants, Solenopsis invict
a. Pseudacteon flies oviposit into adult fire ants, where maggots that eclose fr
om eggs migrate to the ants' head, pupate, and eventually decapitate the host. T
he compatibility of these biocontrol agents was examined by determining if the p
arasitic fly, P. obtusus would become infected if it developed in the microspori
dia-infected fire ants. P. obtusus were allowed to oviposit and develop in V. in
victae infected S. invicta in the laboratory. There was no evidence of microspor
idian infection in P. obtusus adults that developed in heads that were matched t
o infected bodies (n=39). S. invicta bodies that could not be matched with their
 decapitated heads had an estimated infection rate of 87%. V. invictae was not d
etected in any of the P. obtusus that emerged from unmatched heads (N=318). Thes
e results further defined the host specificity of V. invictae and indicated that
 V. invictae will not directly interfere with P. obtusus parasitism.   (This art
icle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, a
nd is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4.2 MB file http://www.sipweb.org/Meeting_Ab
stracts/2008abstracts.pdf   or 2.9 MB (pagination is different) http://www.lifes
ci.susx.ac.uk/home/Neil_Crickmore/cost862/Warwick/Warwick%20Abstracts.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 69559\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D., Valles, S., Porter, S., Cavanaugh, C., Wh
ite, G. and Henke, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction and establishment of fire ant biocont
rol agents in the Coachella Valley of California\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 30-32, In: Proceedings of the 2017 Annual
 Imported Fire Ant and Other Invasive Ants Conference, Mobile, AL, USA, May 16-1
8, 2017, 62 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction and establishment of fire ant b
iocontrol agents in the Coachella Valley of California\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-65, Oct 18, IN: a-2017_Ann Imported Fire Ant &
 Invas Ants Conf\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; California; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophi
le; pathogen; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Solenopsis in
victa virus 3; SINV-3; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseu
dacteon obtusus; biocontrol; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In summary, releases of fire ant biological con
trol agents were made in several irrigated urban landscapes in the Coachella Val
ley of California.  The microsporidian pathogen, Kneallhazia solenopsae, Solenop
sis invicta virus-3, and two species of the fire ant decapitating phorid flies, 
Pseudacteon obtusus and P. curvatus, were recovered for at least 3 years.  All t
hree types of agents increased in prevalence or spread from the original release
 locations, and have survived the extreme heat of the desert climate.   (This ar
ticle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on official time,
 and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4.1 MB file  https://articles.extension.org/
sites/default/files/2017%20IFA%20and%20Invasive%20Ant%20Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 To access the 1984 - 2017 Proceedings use the following link:  \par }
{\f1\fs28 https://articles.extension.org/pages/19000/proceedings-of-the-imported
-fire-ant-conference \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 73666\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D., Valles, S., Porter, S., Cavanaugh, C., Wh
ite, G. and Henke, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2019\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction of fire ant biological control agents
 into the Coachella Valley of California\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  102(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  284-286\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  11 April 2019\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Introduction of fire ant biological control 
agents into the Coachella Valley of California\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/024.102.0156\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-79, Aug 20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; California; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophi
le; pathogen; entomopathogens; Microsporida; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenops
ae; Picornavirales; Solinviviridae; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; parasito
id; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; biocontrol; ir
rigation; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta B
uren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), is a stinging, invasive ant from South America t
hat has plagued the southern US since the 1930s. It is currently established in 
parts of California, including the Coachella Valley. We introduced and establish
ed the fire ant decapitating phorid flies, Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier and Ps
eudacteon obtusus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae); Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (Pic
ornavirales: Solinviviridae) (SINV-3); and the microsporidian fire ant pathogen 
Kneallhazia solenopsae Knell, Allan, & Hazard (Microsporida: Thelohaniidae) for 
the biological control of fire ants in this region of California. This is the fi
rst establishment of fire ant decapitating phorid flies in California. In additi
on, we demonstrated human-mediated establishment of SINV-3 and K. solenopsae in 
hot, dry, but irrigated, urban desert habitat.   (This article was written and p
repared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the
 public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through html  https://bioone.org/journ
als/Florida-Entomologist/volume-102/issue-1/024.102.0156/Introduction-of-Fire-An
t-Biological-Control-Agents-into-the-Coachella/10.1653/024.102.0156.full \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 78403\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2022\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoids and pathogens used against imported fi
re ants in the southern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Van Driesche, R.G., Winston, R.L, Perring, T.M. a
nd Lopez, V.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Contributions of Classical Biocontrol to the 
U.S. Food Security, Forestry, and Biodiversity\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Morgantown, WV\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA-Forest Service, Forest Health Assessment 
and Applied Sciences Team\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  FHAAST-2019-05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  252-265\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  23\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoids and pathogens used against impor
ted fire ants in the southern United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Jan 23\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-100, Jan 23; IN: 2022 Contribut..Classical Bio
cont. FHAAST-2019-05.pdf\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s geminata x xyloni hybrid; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis 
invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review
; distribution; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera: Phoridae;
 Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacte
on nocens; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Microsporidia; Kneallhazi
a solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; i
mpact; agricultural; medical; quarantine; biocontrol; parasitoid flies; pathogen
s; microsporidium; virus; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta),
 black imported fire ant (Solenopsis richteri), and their hybrid, collectively c
alled imported fire ants, or fire ants, are invasive ants that have become ubiqu
itous throughout the southern United States. They are aggressive ants that infli
ct painful stings, which in some cases, cause anaphylaxis. Their large, dominant
 populations can result in damage to crops, livestock, wildlife, and infrastruct
ure (e.g., electrical equipment) with total estimated costs of over $8 billion a
nnually for damage and control. Both the red and black species were well establi
shed and spreading in the United States by the late 1930s. An imported fire ant 
quarantine (>365 million acres) is established in the US to slow transport of ma
terials with fire ants into uninfested areas. Fire ant stings are a major proble
m for people, livestock, and pets with control measures often requiring recurrin
g insecticide treatments. Fire ants can thrive in a wide array of habitats, incl
uding unmanaged and/or inaccessible landscapes which serve as reservoirs for inf
estation of inhabited areas. Biological control is arguably the only viable regi
onal strategy to suppress established populations of invasive ants. Six species 
of parasitoid flies and two pathogens (a microsporidium and a virus) have been r
eleased (1997-2014) and established for the biological control of fire ants in t
he USA. The flies attack worker ants and inhibit their foraging, while the patho
gens cause the debilitation of queens and workers. Dramatic declines in fire ant
 populations have not occurred, but there is evidence for gradual long-term decl
ines. Also, biocontrol agents appear to slow the reinfestation of areas temporar
ily cleared of fire ants via insecticide treatments. These agents represent the 
first concerted efforts to utilize classical and augmentative biological control
 for the long-term suppression of invasive fire ants. Knowledge gained from thes
e efforts will facilitate projects to improve the biological control of fire ant
s and other invasive ants.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Govern
ment employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 23; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this pdf 15.9 MB available through  https://www.f
s.usda.gov/foresthealth/technology/pdfs/FHAAST-2019-05-Contributions-Classical-B
iocontrol.pdf   or in this 15.9 MB pdf available through  https://bugwoodcloud.o
rg/resource/files/23194.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Translated Title:}{\f1\fs28  Alternate citation: Oi, D.H. and S.D. P
orter. 2022. Parasitoids and pathogens used against imported fire ants in the so
uthern United States, pp. 252\u8211?265. In: Van Driesche,  R.G., R.L. Winston, 
T.M. Perring, and V.M. Lopez (eds.). Contributions of Classical Biological Contr
ol to the U.S. Food Security, Forestry, and Biodiversity. FHAAST-2019-05. USDA F
orest Service, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48345\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M. and Briano, 
J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  No detection of Vairimorpha invictae in fire ant d
ecapitating flies reared from V. invictae- infected ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  no pagination (121-122), In: T. Davis, et al
. [compiliers], Proceedings of Annual Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 24-26,
 2008, Charleston, SC, 131 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  No detection of Vairimorpha invictae in fire
 ant decapitating flies reared from V. invictae- infected ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, March 10; IN: a-2008_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; D
iptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; pathogen; microsporidian; Microsporidia; 
Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; invasive species; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Adult worker caste S. invicta from two V. invic
tae infected colonies were exposed for 3 days to P. obtusus in the laboratory.  
Infection rates of the workers were 85% for each colony based on individual wet 
mounts of the workers (n=20 per colony) examined by microscopy.  After exposure 
to the flies, adult ants were held until decapitation.  Ant heads and bodies wer
e collected individually and categorized as: 1) heads that could be matched defi
nitively with bodies (head partially attached to body); 2) heads that probably b
elonged to particular bodies (head near body); and 3) heads that could not be as
signed to specific bodies.  Individual headless bodies were examined for V. invi
ctae spores by microscopy.  Within categories 1 & 2, heads that were associated 
with V. invictae infected bodies were grouped together.  Adult P. obtusus that e
merged were separated by sex and grouped into samples of 7-13 individuals and te
sted for the presence of V. invictae by PCR.  P. obtusus adults that emerged fro
m category 3 heads were sexed and grouped into sets of 16-21 flies for V. invict
ae PCR detection.  There was no evidence of V. invictae infection in P. obtusus 
adults that definitively developed (n=25) or mostly likely developed (N=34) in i
nfected ants.  This indicated that the adult flies were not acquiring infection 
despite development in infected ant hosts.  S. invicta bodies that could not be 
matched with their head capsules had an estimated infection rate of 87% (82/94) 
based on ants from all 3 categories. V. invictae was not detected in any of the 
P. obtusus that emerged from the unmatched heads (N=318).  These results further
 defined the host specificity of V. invictae and indicated that V. invictae will
 not directly interfere with P. obtusus parasitism.   (This article was written 
and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore i
n the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 5.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/6/6e/2008_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40776\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M., Briano, J.A
. and Calcaterra, L.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Phoridae)
: Are they potential vectors of the fire ant pathogens Kneallhazia (=Thelohania)
 solenopsae (Microsporidia: Thelohaniidae) and Vairimorpha invictae (Microsporid
ia: Burenellidae)?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  48(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  310-315\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2009; Available online 21 November 2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon decapitating flies (Diptera: Pho
ridae): Are they potential vectors of the fire ant pathogens Kneallhazia (=Thelo
hania) solenopsae (Microsporidia: Thelohaniidae) and Vairimorpha invictae (Micro
sporidia: Burenellidae)?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control: theory and applica
tion in pest management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2008.11.003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Jan 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; D
iptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obt
usus; parasite; Microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania solenopsae; Va
irimorpha invictae; pathogen; biocontrol agents; biological control; vector; tra
nsmission; entomopathogen; microsporidiosis; infection; disease detection; invas
ive species; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant decapitating flies in the genus Pseuda
cteon were tested for their potential as hosts or vectors of two microsporidian 
pathogens of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. Decapitating flies t
hat attacked or were reared from S. invicta workers infected by Kneallhazia (=Th
elohania) solenopsae or Vairimorpha invictae were tested for either pathogen by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests or visual examination for spores using pha
se microscopy. Three species of fire ant decapitating flies acquired the pathoge
n, Kneallhazia solenopsae. K. solenopsae was detected in 58% of pooled samples o
f Pseudacteon obtusus flies and 44% of pooled samples of Pseudacteon cultellatus
 that developed in K. solenopsae-infected fire ant workers. K. solenopsae was al
so found in 17% of pooled samples of field-collected Pseudacteon curvatus. In co
ntrast, the microsporidium V. invictae was not detected in P. obtusus reared fro
m V. invictae-infected S. invicta workers. Neither K. solenopsae nor V. invictae
 were detected in any of the hovering or ovipositing flies in the laboratory exp
osures, indicating no mechanical acquisition of the microsporidia occurred durin
g oviposition activity. Greater than 92% of the P. obtusus that developed in K. 
solenopsae-infected ants survived and emerged as adults, thus indicating no detr
imental effects of the microsporidium on pupal development and emergence. These 
results indicate that Pseudacteon decapitating flies may be able to vector K. so
lenopsae but not V. invictae among fire ants. Further tests are planned to deter
mine if flies containing K. solenopsae are capable of transferring this pathogen
 either during oviposition or by being consumed by fire ant larvae.   (This arti
cle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, an
d is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=25
550&content=PDF   or pdf available through  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/25550   
or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Oi_et_al-2
009(M-4372).pdf   or   http://www.usmarc.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/pu
blications/Oi_et_al-2009(M-4372).pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/2
5550/PDF \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48350\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M., Briano, J.A
. and Calcaterra, L.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2010(2009)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Presence of the fire ant pathogen Kneallhazia sole
nopsae in fire ant decapitating phorid flies.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 10, In: J. Cooper, et al. [compiliers], P
roceedings of the 2009 Imported Fire Ant & Invasive ant Conference (Proceedings 
of the Annual Imported Fire Ant Conference), April 6-9, 2009, Oklahoma City, Okl
ahoma, 33 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Presence of the fire ant pathogen Kneallhazi
a solenopsae in fire ant decapitating phorid flies.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; D
iptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon obt
usus; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania
 solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invictae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pathogens and parasites from South America are 
being evaluated for the biological control of imported fire ants in the U.S. Fir
e ant decapitating flies that developed in fire ants infected with the fire ant 
pathogen Kneallhazia (formerly Thelohania) solenopsae also acquired the pathogen
. K. solenopsae was found in 51% of pooled samples, which included three species
 of flies: Pseudacteon obtusus, Pseudacteon cultellatus, and Pseudacteon curvatu
s. The infected P. curvatus were collected from the field in Florida. This is th
e first report of a fire ant pathogen being detected in another fire ant biocont
rol agent. K. solenopsae was not detected in any of the hovering or ovipositing 
flies in laboratory exposures, indicating that mechanical acquisition of the pat
hogen did not occur during oviposition activity. Greater than 92% of the P. obtu
sus that developed in K. solenopsae-infected ants survived and emerged as adults
. These preliminary observations indicated there were no detrimental effects of 
the pathogen on the flies. The finding of K. solenopsae in apparently healthy fl
ies offers the possibility that the flies can transmit K. solenopsae, and perhap
s facilitate the spread of the disease among fire ant populations.   (This artic
le was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and
 is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki
/files/8/89/2009_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 54318\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H., Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2012\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) pathogen, V
airimorpha invictae (Microsporidia: Burenellidae), not detected in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  95(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  506-508\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2012\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) patho
gen, Vairimorpha invictae (Microsporidia: Burenellidae), not detected in Florida
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   http://www.bioone
.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.095.0242\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-SDP, July 12\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Mississippi; South Carolina; scienti
fic; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; microsporidium; Microsporid
a; Protozoa; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Vairimorpha invictae; biocontrol; invasive 
species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Surveys were conducted to search specifically f
or the microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invictae in red imported fire ants (S
olenopsis invicta), in the U.S. V. invictae was not detected in any of the 1,016
 nest samples collected in 21 counties located in 5 states. A majority of sample
s (83%) originated from Florida. Despite the absence of V. invictae, another mic
rosporidum, K. solenopsae, was detected in 14.5% of the samples. Based on our sa
mpling, V. invictae is currently not established in the U.S. V. invictae represe
nts an additional natural enemy that could be imported from South America for th
e classical biological control of S. invicta.  (This article was written and pre
pared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the p
ublic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 13; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.095.0242  
 or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Oi_et_al-
2012(M-5348).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/viewFile/79318/7
6662   or   https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sanford_Porter/publication/2600
97823_The_Fire_Ant_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_Pathogen_Vairimorpha_invictae_Microspo
ridia_Burenellidae_Not_Detected_in_Florida/links/582637c208ae5c0137eba3b1.pdf   
or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.095.0242 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40577\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, D.H., Williams, D.F., Pereira, R.M., Horton, 
P., Davis, T.S., Hyder, A.H., Bolton, H.T., Zeichner, B.C., Porter, S.D., Hoch, 
A.L., Boswell, M.L. and Williams, G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Combining biological and chemical controls for man
agement of red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Am. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  54(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  44-53\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Feb. 14, 2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Combining biological and chemical controls f
or management of red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  American Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ae/54.1.46\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-12, Apr 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Brachymyrmex; C
amponotus; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Forelius; Formica; Hypoponera; Lasius; Nei
vamyrmex; Paratrechina; Pheidole; Pyramica; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Dipl
ohoptrum); Trachymyrmex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Att
ini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; South Carolina; South America; Brazil; scien
tific; nests; foraging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; P
seudacteon tricuspis; pathogens; Thelohania solenopsae; biological control agent
s; chemical control; fipronil; insecticides; natural enemies; pesticide applicat
ion; population growth; biocontrol; invasive species; pitfall traps; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Two South American natural enemies of imported 
fire ants were first detected or released in the United States approximately 10 
years ago. The fire ant pathogen, Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen, and Hazard
, was found in the U.S. in 1996 and a parasitic phorid fly from Brazil, Pseudact
eon tricuspis Borgmeier, was released in 1997 and both are well established in f
ire ant infested areas. As biological control agents of the red imported fire an
t, Solenopsis invicta Buren, their colony-level impact in the field is often ind
irect and subtle as they work slowly by debilitating queens and impeding foragin
g by workers. Their effect on colony densities may be inadequate in sensitive si
tes, where people have a low tolerance for fire ant stings, and where control ma
y require faster-acting insecticide treatments. Comparisons of S. invicta popula
tions and the presence of other ants were made among field sites that 1) were tr
eated with insecticide containing fipronil and where the biocontrol agents T. so
lenopsae and P. tricuspis were also released and established (integrated site); 
2) were treated only with the fipronil insecticide (chemical site); and, 3) were
 not treated (untreated site). S. invicta populations were suppressed by \u8805?
95% for 3 years at the integrated site. In the chemical site, S. invicta control
 was \u8804?85% after 1.4 years, while the untreated site had an average 32% inc
rease in population. Average prevalence of T. solenopsae among nests per plot pe
aked at 72% and P. tricuspis was observed at the release site and up to 5 km awa
y. The average percentage of ants other than S. invicta collected in pitfall tra
ps in the insecticide-treated area of the integrated site increased from 13% bef
ore treatment to 70% for the last 2 years of the study. In the chemical site, th
e percentage of non-S. invicta ants was 0.4% before insecticide application and 
averaged 9% for the final 2 years. Non-S. invicta ants averaged 9.6% (range, 2.7
-17.3%) in the untreated site for the entire study. The extended reduction in S.
 invicta populations in the integrated site demonstrated a potential impact of t
he establishment of biological control agents for imported fire ants.   (This ar
ticle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, 
and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615
1015/publications/Oi_et_al-2008(M-4262).pdf   or 1.6 MB pdf available through ht
ml  https://academic.oup.com/ae/article/54/1/46/2474861   or pdf available throu
gh  http://handle.nal.usda.gov/10113/55763   or 1.7 MB pdf available through  ht
tps://www.researchgate.net/publication/224497330_Combining_Biological_and_Chemic
al_Controls_for_the_Management_of_Red_Imported_Fire_Ants_Hymenoptera_Formicidae 
\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36331\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Oi, F.M., Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D. and Koehler, P.G
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ants: do's and don'ts\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pest Cont. Tech.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  29 (4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  48, 52-54, 56\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ants: do's and don'ts\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pest Control Technology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; popular; biology; distribution; nest; impact; eco
nomic; medical; urban; chemical control; bait; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 96; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Oi_et_al-2001(M-3635).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 71105\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Olendraite, I., Lukhovitskaya, N.I., Porter, S.D.
, Valles, S.M. and Firth, A.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Polycipiviridae: a proposed new family of polycist
ronic picorna-like RNA viruses\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Gen. Virol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  98(9)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  2368-2378\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2017; online Aug, 31, 2017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Polycipiviridae: a proposed new family of po
lycistronic picorna-like RNA viruses\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of General Virology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1099/jgv.0.000902\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-71, Aug 19\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Formica exsecta; Lasius flavus
; Lasius niger; Lasius neglectus; Linepithema humile; Myrmica scabrinodis; Monom
orium pharaonis; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; Europe; England; UK; North Amer
ica; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; genome; disease; virus;
 taxonomy; Picornavirales; RNA virus; helicase; internal ribosome entry site; Ln
eV-1; Lasius neglectus virus 1; LniV-1; Lasius niger virus 1; MsaV-1; Myrmica sc
abrinodis virus 1; open reading frame; protease; RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; S
INV-2; Solenopsis invicta virus 2; SINV-4; Solenopsis invicta virus 4; single nu
cleotide polymorphism; transcriptome shotgun assembly; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 2 is a single-stranded
 positive-sense picorna-like RNA virus with an unusual genome structure. The mon
opartite genome of approximately 11\u8201?kb contains four open reading frames i
n its 5\u8242? third, three of which encode proteins with homology to picornavir
us-like jelly-roll fold capsid proteins. These are followed by an intergenic reg
ion, and then a single long open reading frame that covers the 3\u8242? two-thir
ds of the genome. The polypeptide translation of this 3\u8242? open reading fram
e contains motifs characteristic of picornavirus-like helicase, protease and RNA
-dependent RNA polymerase domains. An inspection of public transcriptome shotgun
 assembly sequences revealed five related apparently nearly complete virus genom
es isolated from ant species and one from a dipteran insect. By high-throughput 
sequencing and in silico assembly of RNA isolated from Solenopsis invicta and fo
ur other ant species, followed by targeted Sanger sequencing, we obtained nearly
 complete genomes for four further viruses in the group. Four further sequences 
were obtained from a recent large-scale invertebrate virus study. The 15 sequenc
es are highly divergent (pairwise amino acid identities of as low as 17\u8202?% 
in the non-structural polyprotein), but possess the same overall polycistronic g
enome structure, which is distinct from all other characterized picorna-like vir
uses. Consequently, we propose the formation of a new virus family, Polycipiviri
dae, to classify this clade of arthropod-infecting polycistronic picorna-like vi
ruses. We further propose that this family be divided into three genera: Chipoly
civirus (2 species), Hupolycivirus (2 species) and Sopolycivirus (11 species), w
ith members of the latter infecting ants in at least 3 different subfamilies.   
(This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on officia
l time and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Adult worker Solenopsi
s invicta ants were collected from 46 nests in the E portion of the state of For
mosa, Argentina.  Adult L. flavus, L. neglectus, L. niger, & M. scabrinodis ants
 were collected from individual nests in Cambridge, UK.  Other species listed ar
e from Table 1 & contain viruses included in the proposed family Polycipiviridae
.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1.5 MB  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5656759/pdf/jgv-98-2368.pdf   or 1.5 MB  https://aspace.repository.cam.ac.uk/
bitstream/handle/1810/266958/Olendraite_et_al-2017-Journal_of_General_Virology-V
oR.pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y   or 1.5 MB  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/
Ingrida_Olendraite2/publication/319404808_Polycipiviridae_A_proposed_new_family_
of_polycistronic_picorna-like_RNA_viruses/links/59ad588daca272f8a1616281/Polycip
iviridae-A-proposed-new-family-of-polycistronic-picorna-like-RNA-viruses.pdf   o
r 1.5 MB  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/ecf7/55a3f9cf01cad93a3e249b99a5b05443
a8bd.pdf   or pdf available through  https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/181
0/266958   or html  https://www.microbiologyresearch.org/content/journal/jgv/10.
1099/jgv.0.000902   or html  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC565675
9/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplemental information available through  https://www.microbiologyre
search.org/content/journal/jgv/10.1099/jgv.0.000902#supplementary_data \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplemental information:     Figure S1. Analysis of 5\u8242? ends of 
polycipivirus sequences.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Figure S2. Conserved helicase motifs in polycipivirus sequences.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Figure S3. Conserved protease motifs in polycipivirus sequences.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Figure S4. Conserved RdRp motifs in polycipivirus sequences.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39507\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Parkman, P., Vail, K., Rashid, T., Oliver, J., Pe
reira, R.M., Porter, S.D., Shires, M., Haun, G., Powell, S., Thead, L.G. and Vog
t, J.T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment and spread of Pseudacteon curvatus i
n Tennessee\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 111-112, In: R. Weeks, et al. [compiliers
], Proceedings of Annual Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 22-24, 2005, Gu
lfport, MS, 254 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment and spread of Pseudacteon curv
atus in Tennessee\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2005_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta x richteri 
hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Georgia; M
ississippi; Tennessee; scientific; mounds; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile;
 parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspus; rel
ease; establishment; spread; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  All of the release sites were pastures witht he
 exception of the 2003 Franklin release of P. Curvatus which was made at an orna
mental nursery, and the 2004 release which was made at a cemetery. All releases 
of P. curvatus were of the Los Flores biotype except for the July 2004 release i
n Hamilton Co. where the Formosan biotype was released and Monroe counties in 20
00 and 2001 yielded no adult flies and the releases were considered failures. Co
llections of P. curvatus at the Franklin Co. pasture release site in July and Au
gust 2003 indicated the flies released the previous year had successfully overwi
ntered and were established. Oly one P. tricuspis adult has been collected: at t
he Franklin Co. release site in July 2003.   (This article was written and prepa
red by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pub
lic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/research/publications/public
ations.htm?SEQ_NO_115=190071   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Use
rFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Parkman_et_al-2005(M-4066).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 o
r in this 11.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/f/fe/2005_IFA_C
onference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 45183\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Patrock, R.J.W., Porter, S.D., Gilbert, L.E. and 
Folgarait, P.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distributional patterns of Pseudacteon associated 
with the Solenopsis saevissima complex in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Insect Sci.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9: 60\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  17 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  20 August 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distributional patterns of Pseudacteon assoc
iated with the Solenopsis saevissima complex in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Insect Science (Online)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b PMCID:}{\f1\fs28  4431\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-SDP, Patrock_et_al-2009(M-4431)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima complex;
 Myrmicinae; South America; scientific; classical biological control; imported f
ire ants; parasitoid; Phoridae; geographical ranges; host use patterns; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Classical biological control efforts against th
e imported fire ants have largely involved the use of Pseudacteon parasitoids.  
To facilitate further exploration for species and population biotypes we organiz
ed a database of collection records for Pseudacteon species, including those fro
m the literature and other sources.  These data were then used to map the geogra
phical ranges of species associated with the imported fire ants in their native 
range in South America.  In addition, we found geographical range metrics for al
l species in the genus and related these metrics to latitude and host use.  Appr
oximately equal numbers of Pseudacteon species were found in temperate and tropi
cal regions, though the majority of taxa found only in temperate areas were foun
d in the Northern Hemisphere.  No significant differences in sizes of geographic
al ranges were found between Pseudacteon associated with the different host comp
lexes of the fire ants despite the much larger and systemic collection effort  a
ssociated with the S. saevissima host group.  Geographical range of the flies wa
s loosely associated with both the number of hosts and the geographical range of
 their hosts.  Pseudacteon with the most extensive ranges had either multiple ho
sts or hosts with broad distributions.  Mean species richnesses of Pseudacteon i
n locality species assemblages associated with S. saevissima complex ants was 2.
8 species, but intensively sampled locations were usually higher.  We discuss po
ssible factors related to variation in geographical range size and outline areas
 in southern South America that have likely been under-explored for Pseudacteon 
associated with imported fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 09; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP, from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://jinsectscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/jis
/9/1/60.full.pdf   or 1.2 MB http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3011915
/pdf/031.009.6001.pdf   or 2.7 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/661
51015/publications/Patrock_et_al-2009(M-4431).pdf   or 2.7 MB http://naldc.nal.u
sda.gov/download/37396/PDF   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.net/1011
3/37396   or html http://jinsectscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/9/1/60.full  
 or html http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3011915/   or html http://1
44.92.199.79/9.60/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33916\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Pereira, R.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Use of baits for evaluation of fire ant population
s in the USDA areawide project.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 121-122, In: R. Weeks, et al. [compiliers
], Proceedings of Annual Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 22-24, 2005, Gu
lfport, MS, 254 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Use of baits for evaluation of fire ant popu
lations in the USDA areawide project.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 06; IN: PDF-10: a-2005_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; nest; populations; baits; mound counts; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In sites used in the USDA-ARS Areawide Fire Ant
 Suppression project, ftre ant populations are monitored using baits (ant activi
ty monitoring) or mound counts (mounds rated using the USDA Population Index [PI
] rating). For ant activity monitoring, 10 slices of beef wieners are placed abo
ut 8-paces apart in a circle around the sampling plot centers. After 30-60 minut
es, baits are observed and rated from 0-4 depending on number of ftre ants prese
nt at the bait. These observations allow the calculation of % of baits where IFA
 are present. All mounds present in the sampling plots are counted and given a r
ating varying from 1-10 depending on the number of ants in the nest and the abse
nce (rating =1-5) or presence of brood (rating =6-10).  The treatment threshold 
used in this program is 20 mounds with PI>7 per acre, but no threshold has been 
established using the ant activity monitoring baits. Therefore, we were interest
ed whether the ant activity as measured in the beef wiener baits corresponded to
 the level of ant population as measured by the mound counts and PI rating. This
 is important because the ant activity monitoring is: easier to use, less labor-
 and time intensive, more efficient in detecting low populations, and serves as 
an indicator of adequate time for chemical bait applications because it determin
es if foraging is occurring.  Data from all 5 cooperating states show that there
 is a strong correlation between the ant activity as measured by the baits and t
he ant population as measured by number of mounds or the PI.  Although the corre
lation is stronger when using the rating for the number of ants present at the b
aits, the percentage of baits occupied by fire ants also provide reliable inform
ation, with lesser requirement in effort and technical knowledge by the operator
. The ant activity bait responds rapidly to an increase in ant population, and b
aits can be quickly overwhelmed by fire ants if populations are above levels usu
ally considered damaging and in need of control The pre-established threshold (2
0 mounds/acre) corresponds to 30-45% ofthe baits occupied by fire ants.  In a si
mulation in the laboratory, the ant activity bait data were used as the decision
 tool in determining the need for fire ant control treatment in the different de
monstration sites for the areawide project over the past 3-4 years. The decision
s to apply formicides were similar in >80% of the times whether the mound counts
-PI or the ant activity bait (% of bait occupied by fire ants) were used. Variat
ion of the data negates any differences in the decisions when the different meth
ods were used.  In conclusion, ant activity monitoring baits (slices of beef wie
ners) are good indicators of fire ant populations in pastures. Compared to mound
 counts-PI, ant activity baits tend to  underestimate the ant population in cool
er months and overestimate the ant population in warmer months. However, because
 they are easier and less expensive to use, the ant activity monitoring baits ca
n be recommended as a simple, user-friendly method for evaluation of fire ant po
pulations, and as a decision tool in fire ant control programs.    (This article
 was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and i
s therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-4061.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/public
ations/Pereira_and_Porter-2005(M-4061).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or in this 11.1 MB file 
 http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/f/fe/2005_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.p
df \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36643\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Pereira, R.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Range expansion of the fire ant decapitating fly, 
Pseudacteon tricuspis, eight to nine years after releases in North Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  89(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  536-538\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Range expansion of the fire ant decapitating
 fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, eight to nine years after releases in North Florida
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-8, July 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile;
 parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; range expansion; parasito
id release; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  These rates of expansion are approximately 20-1
80% faster than the respective rates observed in 2001.  Currently the flies occu
py about 86,500 km2 compared to the 8,100 km2 in the fall of 2001.  Higher rates
 of expansion could simply be the result of larger populations of flies or evolu
tionary selection of flies that disperse farther.  Decapitating flies are expand
ing northward at higher rates than they are to the south, but the reason for thi
s is uncertain.  As the decapitating flies move further north, they will eventua
lly encounter colder temperatures and shorter growing seasons which will permit 
fewer generations of flies per year and probably result in a slower rate of nort
hward expansion.  Several successful releases have been made in South Florida, i
ncluding in Bonita Springs (1999) and Sarasota, FL (2002).  Either site could be
 responsible for the fly population found in Arcadia, FL in Nov 2005, approximat
ely 100 and 70 km away, respectively.   Releases in Dothan, AL (2000) may explai
n the flies found in Calhoun Co. in the Florida Panhandle, but recent field surv
eys have not recovered flies around Dothan.  Flies found in Calhoun Co. also cou
ld have originated in Gainesville, FL, based on the rate of expansion up the eas
t coast of Georgia.  Considering the observed expansion rates and the additional
 successful releases of P. tricuspis in southern Florida and elsewhere in the st
ate, it is likely that almost all of Florida will have resident populations of P
. tricuspis in the next 3 to 5 years.   (This article was written and prepared b
y U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public d
omain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe89p536.pdf   or   http:
//naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=3226&content=PDF   or   http://www.
ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Pereira_and_Porter-2006(M-
4177).pdf    or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/0015-4040%282006%2989%5B
536%3AREOTFA%5D2.0.CO%3B2   or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/0015-
4040%282006%2989%5B536%3AREOTFA%5D2.0.CO%3B2   or pdf available through http://h
dl.handle.net/10113/3226 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 22524\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Pesquero, M.A., Campiolo, S., Fowler, H.G. and Po
rter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Diurnal patterns of ovipositional activity in two 
Pseudacteon fly parasitoids (Diptera: Phoridae) of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenop
tera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  79(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  455-457\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Diurnal patterns of ovipositional activity i
n two Pseudacteon fly parasitoids (Diptera: Phoridae) of Solenopsis fire ants (H
ymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmici
nae; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; temperature; temporal; season; d
iurnal; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phorida
e; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon
 pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; 
biocontrol; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Two phorid parasitoids of Solenopsis fire ants 
in Brazil were active at different times of the day.  Pseudacteon litoralis was 
most active in the early morning and evening while P. tricuspis was most active 
during the afternoon.          *[Of 492 females collected over a year: P. curvat
us, 3%; P. litoralis, 17%; P. obtusus, 4%; P. pradei, 1.6%; P. solenopsidis, 1.2
%; P. tricuspis, 73%; P. wasmanni, 0.2%.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from TEK; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3053.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe79p455.pdf   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul 
p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Pesquero_et_al-199
6(M-3053).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or pdf available through https://www.researchgate.net
/publication/253645542_Diurnal_Patterns_of_Ovipositional_Activity_in_Two_Pseudac
teon_Fly_Parasitoids_Diptera_Phoridae_of_Solenopsis_Fire_Ants_Hymenoptera_Formic
idae \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 22525\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Pesquero, M.A., Fowler, H.G. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The social parasitic ant, Solenopsis (= Labauchena
) daguerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Sao Paulo, Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Biol. Trop.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  46\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  464-465\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The social parasitic ant, Solenopsis (= Laba
uchena) daguerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Sao Paulo, Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista de Biolog\u237?a Tropical (San
 Jose, Costa Rica)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-9, Aug 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Labauchena daguerrei; Solenops
is daguerrei; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientif
ic; distribution; host records; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Hymenoptera; p
arasitic ant; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 00; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Pesquero_et_al-1998(M-).pdf   or   http://www.scielo.sa.cr/scielo.p
hp?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0034-77441998000200030&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=en   or   
http://www.antwiki.org/wiki/images/0/0c/Fowler_1998.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 22523\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Pesquero, M.A., Porter, S.D., Fowler, H.G. and Ca
mpiolo, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing of Pseudacteon spp. (Dipt. Phoridae), para
sitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis spp.) (Hym., Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Appl. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  119(1-5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  677-678\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing of Pseudacteon spp. (Dipt. Phoridae)
, parasitoids of fire ants (Solenopsis spp.) (Hym., Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Applied Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1111/j.1439-0418.1995.tb01357.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmici
nae; South America; Brazil; scientific; colony; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile
; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon wa
smanni; biocontrol; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  After exposure of Solenopsis saevissima colonie
s maintained in plastic trays to phorid attack in the field, and subsequent tran
sfer of colonies to covered plastic buckets, we confirmed the P. wasmanni and P.
 litoralis are indeed parasitoids of fire ant workers.  The period from attack t
o emergence of phorid adults ranged from 35 to 46 days.  Adult phorids were main
tained live in glass vials with sugar water as a food source for 5 days.  These 
results indicate that Pseudacteon can be reared for biological control release p
rograms with minimal difficulty.  Furthermore, parasitized workers could be easi
ly transferred from South America to quarantine laboratories within the egg to a
dult emergence time period.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from TEK; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3060.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Pesquer
o_et_al-1995(M-3060).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 22538\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Petal, J., Jakubczyk, H. and Wojcik, Z.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1970\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence des fourmis sur les modifications des so
ls et des plantes dans les milieux de prairie\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Phillipson, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Methods of study in soil ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  New York, NY.  303 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  UNIPUB\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  235-240\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence des fourmis sur les modifications 
des sols et des plantes dans les milieux de prairie\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; scientific; ecology; fauna; so
il modification; grassland environment; habitats; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from UCD Ant Database; from Brown 
reprint cards; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Proceedings of the Paris symposium organi
zed by UNESCO and the International Biological Programme.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Translated Title:}{\f1\fs28  = The influence of ants in modifying th
e soil and vegetation of grassland environments.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38510\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Poinar, G.O., Jr., Porter, S.D., Tang, S. and Hym
an, B.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Allomermis solenopsi n. sp. (Nematoda: Mermithidae
) parasitising the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) i
n Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Syst. Parasitol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  68(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  115-128\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 2007; online Oct. 3, 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Allomermis solenopsi n. sp. (Nematoda: Mermi
thidae) parasitising the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formici
dae) in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Systematic Parasitology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11230-007-9102-x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Argentina; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; pa
rasite; entomopathogenic nematodes; Mermithidae; Allomermis solenopsi; morpholog
y; taxonomy; molecular systematics; ribosomal DNA; nucleotide sequences; phyloge
ny; biocontrol agents; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Allomermis solenopsi n. sp. (Mermithidae: Nemat
oda) is described from the fire ant Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formi
cidae) in Argentina. Diagnostic characters of the new species include stiff and 
erect processes on the surface of the mature egg, small female amphids, extensio
n of the latero-medial rows of male genital papillae beyond the middle rows, an 
obliquely truncate spicule tip and a ventrally swollen male terminus. This is th
e first record of Allomermis Steiner, 1924 from South America and the first host
 record for members of this genus. Previous records of mermithids from Solenopsi
s spp. are summarized. The placement in Allomermis was confirmed by molecular an
alyses based on nuclear 18S ribosomal DNA sequences, the first such molecular fr
amework for the Mermithidae.  The possible life-cycle of the parasite is discuss
ed, with the aim of using A. solenopsi as a biological control agent for fire an
ts in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Govern
ment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=67
07&content=PDF   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.net/10113/6707   or 
  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications   }{\f1\fs28 
or pdf available through https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5931614_Allome
rmis_solenopsi_n._sp_%28Nematoda__Mermithidae%29_parasitising_the_fire_ant_Solen
opsis_invicta_Buren_%28Hymenoptera__Formicidae%29_in_Argentina \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23029\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.A., Thompson, P., Black, H.L. and Jorge
nsen, C.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Genetic variability in a population of Paraponera 
clavata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwest. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  31(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  381-385\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 11, 1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Genetic variability in a population of Parap
onera clavata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Southwestern Naturalist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.2307/3671843\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Paraponera clavata; Paraponeri
nae; North America; Panama; scientific; monogyny; colonies; genetics; genetic va
riation; heterozygosity; electrophoresis; allele; enzyme; loci; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Electrophoretic variation was studied in a po
pulation of Paraponera clavata (F.) on Barro Colorado Island, Panama.  Nineteen 
of 20 loci were monomorphic, & variation was found in only one of 26 colonies.  
All twenty workers examined from this colony were heterozygous for an alternate 
allele at Est-3.  The expected level of heterozygosity (\u292?) of the populatio
n was 0.001, one of the lowest reported for ants.  This value is consistent with
 the generally observed low level of genetic variation among hymenopterans.  Som
e evidence was found for the presence of only one singly mated queen per colony 
of P. clavata.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39724\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1910\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hongos cultivados por hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  14\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  111\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hongos cultivados por hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista Chilena de Historia Natural\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South Amer
ica; Chile; scientific; symbiosis; fungus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bi
bliography; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited From: Torres-Contreras, H., 2001, A
ntecedentes biol\u243?gicos de hormigas presentes en Chile publicados en revista
s cient\u237?ficas nacionales y extranjeras durante el siglo XX, Rev. Chil. Hist
. Nat. 74: 653-668.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39725\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1915\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Larva que vive en simbiosis con hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  19\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  50\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Larva que vive en simbiosis con hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista Chilena de Historia Natural\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South Amer
ica; Chile; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; larvae; symbiosis; fungus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bi
bliography; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited From: Torres-Contreras, H., 2001, A
ntecedentes biol\u243?gicos de hormigas presentes en Chile publicados en revista
s cient\u237?ficas nacionales y extranjeras durante el siglo XX, Rev. Chil. Hist
. Nat. 74: 653-668.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39726\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1923\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Brac\u243?nidos de los nidos de hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  27\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  194\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Brac\u243?nidos de los nidos de hormigas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista Chilena de Historia Natural\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South Amer
ica; Chile; scientific; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; Hymenoptera; Braconidae; 
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant bi
bliography, not in Cherrett; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited From: Torres-Contreras, H., 2001, A
ntecedentes biol\u243?gicos de hormigas presentes en Chile publicados en revista
s cient\u237?ficas nacionales y extranjeras durante el siglo XX, Rev. Chil. Hist
. Nat. 74: 653-668.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39727\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1923\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hormigas nuevas chilenas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  27\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  196-197\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  20 Oct. 1923\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hormigas nuevas chilenas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista Chilena de Historia Natural\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis gayi v. fazi; Solen
opsis thoracica; Tapinoma fazi; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; South America; Chile
; scientific; taxonomy; distribution; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Santischi described Solenopsis gayi v. fazi n. 
var., Solenopsis thoracica n. sp., & Tapinoma fazi n. sp. from Chile.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited From: Torres-Contreras, H., 2001, A
ntecedentes biol\u243?gicos de hormigas presentes en Chile publicados en revista
s cient\u237?ficas nacionales y extranjeras durante el siglo XX, Rev. Chil. Hist
. Nat. 74: 653-668.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  viewable & pdf available through  https://www.biodiv
ersitylibrary.org/item/50909#page/202/mode/1up \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39728\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1926\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hormigas contra piojos\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rev. Chil. Hist. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  30\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  401-402\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Hormigas contra piojos\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Revista Chilena de Historia Natural\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Attini; South Amer
ica; Chile; scientific; fungus gardens; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant bi
bliography, not in Cherrett; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Cited From: Torres-Contreras, H., 2001, A
ntecedentes biol\u243?gicos de hormigas presentes en Chile publicados en revista
s cient\u237?ficas nacionales y extranjeras durante el siglo XX, Rev. Chil. Hist
. Nat. 74: 653-668.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23052\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, C.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant biocontrol with phorid and other natural 
enemies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Landscape & Nursery Digest\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  29(7)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  38-39\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant biocontrol with phorid and other na
tural enemies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Landscape & Nursery Digest\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguer
rei; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Texas
; Virginia; South America; Brazil; popular; biology; oviposition; behavior; fora
ging; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; pathogen; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon
; Microsporida; Thelohania solenopsae; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2939.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 42810\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, E.E. and Hawkins, B.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Latitudinal gradients in colony size for social in
sects: termites and ants show different patterns\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Am. Nat.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  157(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  97-106\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  January 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Latitudinal gradients in colony size for soc
ial insects: termites and ants show different patterns\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  American Naturalist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; scientific; colony size; latit
udinal gradients; fasting endurance hypothesis; models; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[On the basis of a comparison of Nearctic & Ne
otropical ants, social insects have been proposed to show a latitudinal gradient
 in colony size.  Further, the 'fasting endurance hypothesis', which predicts la
rger colonies in areas with extended periods of low food availability, was propo
sed as the mechanism driving the gradient.  We conclude that the pattern identif
ied for ants cannot be generalized to include social insects as a whole.  As is 
the case for ecogeographic gradients in insect body sizes, a pattern that is rep
orted for one taxon may not be consistent for other taxa at the global level.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 09; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23033\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  General fire ant problem areas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Vinson, S.B. and Teer, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  The imported fire ant: Assessment and recomme
ndations\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Austin, TX\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Proc. Governor's Conf., Sportsmen Conservation
ists of Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  110\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  General fire ant problem areas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; South America; review; biology; taxonomy; ecology; 
behavior; chemical control; biocontrol; impact; economic; quarantine; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Thesis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Social structure of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrme
x owyheei: a disposable forager strategy\par }
{\f1\fs28\b University:}{\f1\fs28  Brigham Young Univ.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Social structure of the harvester ant, Pogon
omyrmex owyheei: a disposable forager strategy\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; foragers; Pogonomyrmex owyheei
; Pogonomyrmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; caste; biomass; d
ivision of labor; age polyethism; longevity; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Exterior workers of the harvester ant, Pogonomy
rmex owyheei, were subdivided into forager, defender and refuse worker behavior 
roles (Fig. 2).  Exterior workers comprised approximately 16% of the total colon
y population with interior workers comprising the remainder.  An average of less
 than 10% of the total worker population foraged (Table 1).  Studies of role cha
nges confirmed a general one-way progression from interior workers progressed to
ward foraging, their dry weights declined approximately 40% (Fig. 3) and mandibl
e wear increased (Table 2).  Based on these results, we propose that P. owyheei 
has evolved a disposable forager strategy that tolerates high forager mortality.
  The large reservoir of interior workers required by this strategy may also inh
ibit the evolution of physically specialized interior worker castes.  (abstract 
provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from-SDP, verified-SDP;\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23023\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1983\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fast, accurate method of measuring ant head widths
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  76(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  866-867\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 1983\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fast, accurate method of measuring ant head 
widths\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/76.5.866\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Formica fusca; Pogonomyrmex ba
dius; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; s
cientific; polymorphism; worker size; caste size; methods; head width; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A wedge micrometer, constructed from two micros
cope slides, provides a fast and accurate alternative to an ocular micrometer fo
r measuring the width of ant heads and other similarly shaped objects.  (abstrac
t provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/aesa
/article/76/5/866/57001 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Thesis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23024\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1984\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism: ergonomics of brood product
ion\par }
{\f1\fs28\b University:}{\f1\fs28  Ph.D. dissert., Florida State University, Tal
lahassee, 83 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism: ergonomics of brood p
roduction\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polymorphism; growth; colony formatio
n; physiology; brood production efficiency; ergonomics; behavior; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  see abstract under Porter 1985 [Dissert. 
Abstr. Int. B 45: 452-3]  [Order # 8412506]\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23027\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Masoncus spider: a miniature predator of Collembol
a in harvester ant colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Psyche\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  92\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  145-150\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Masoncus spider: a miniature predator of Col
lembola in harvester ant colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Psyche (Cambridge)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Pogonomyrmex ba
dius; Solenopsis; Trachymyrmex; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida;
 scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; Araneae; Linyphiidae; Masoncus; m
ites; Belbidae; Laelaspidae; Rhodacaridae; Uropodidae; Thysanura; Nicoletiidae; 
Diplura; Japygidae; Coleoptera; Staphylinidae; millipede; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  An undescribed spider of the genus Masoncus (Li
nyphiidae: Erigoninae) was commonly found in colonies of the harvester ant Pogon
omyrmex badius.  This miniature spider is a predator of Collembola and all of it
s life stages were present in the harvester ant colonies.  Includes table listin
g symbotic spiders & their hosts.  (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP; verified-SDP; verified-D
PW, USDA-CMAVE M-2356.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or     http://psyche.entclub.org/pdf/92/92-145.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23030\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Revised respiration rates for the southern harvest
er ant, Pogonomyrmex badius\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Comp. Physiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  83\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  197-198\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Revised respiration rates for the southern h
arvester ant, Pogonomyrmex badius\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiolog
y Part A Comparative Physiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/0300-9629(86)90107-6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex badius; Myrmicina
e; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; worker size; larvae; pupae; temperat
ure; physiology; respiration; oxygen consumption; O2; bioenergetics; energy flow
; respiration rate; metabolism; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Respiration rates of Pogonomyrmex badius worker
s were very similar to other myrmicine ants, but 30 times less than previously r
eported (Golley and Gentry, 1964).\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP; verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 50773\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Insect defenses.  (book review of "Defensive mecha
nisms in Social insects." H.R. Hermann, Ed.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bioscience\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  36(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  196\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Insect defenses.  (book review of "Defensive
 mechanisms in Social insects." H.R. Hermann, Ed.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bioscience\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; book review; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from-DPW;\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23032\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effects of boric acid bait on laboratory fire 
ant colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 79-81, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler & ed.
], Proceedings of the 1988 imported fire ant conference, May 4-5, 1988, Athens, 
Georgia, 175 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effects of boric acid bait on laboratory
 fire ant colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-21: IN: a-1988_IFA_Conference; PD
F-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; chemical control; boric acid bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Boric acid baits killed large numbers of fire a
nt (Solenopsis invicta) workers and larvae in laboratory colonies. Queens and pu
pae, however, were not eliminated, and most treated colonies resumed brood produ
ction after 3-5 weeks.  These results indicate that boric acid is not a suitable
 toxicant for large-scale or long-term control programs.  Nevertheless, boric ac
id might be useful in combination with growth hormones or for small areas that c
an be retreated every few months.  (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-SDP, verified-SDP; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter-1988(M-2329).pdf   or in this 5.1 MB file    http://www.exte
nsion.org/mediawiki/files/6/68/1988_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23034\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of imported fire ants on native invertebrat
e communities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Vinson, S.B. and Teer, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  The imported fire ant: Assessment and recomme
ndations\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Austin, TX\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Proc. Governor's Conf., Sportsmen Conservation
ists of Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  65-69\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of imported fire ants on native inver
tebrate communities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; review; biology; prey; polygyny; temperature; ecolo
gy; distribution; population; dispersal; impact; ecological; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  see Porter 1988; Invasion of polygyne fir
e ants.....; SDP\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23035\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of temperature on colony growth and develop
mental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Insect Physiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  34(12)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1127-1133\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1988; online 1 October 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of temperature on colony growth and d
evelopmental rates of the ant, Solenopsis invicta\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Insect Physiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1910(88)90215-6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Jul 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; growth; temperature; nanitic 
brood; physiology; development rate; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Growth rates of the fire ant, S. invicta, were 
studied across a range of constant temperatures.  Growth in established colonies
 only occurred at rather warm temperatures: between 24 and 36\u176?C, with maxim
al growth around 32\u176?C.  Colony growth ceased below 24\u176?C even though 17
\u176?C was the theoretical minimum for brood development.  Total developmental 
time (egg to adult) for minor worker brood decreased from 55 days at 24\u176?C t
o 23 days at 35\u176?.  The proportion of time required by each developmental st
age (i.e. eggs, larvae, pupae) was independent of temperature.  Nanitic brood de
veloped about 35% faster than did minor worker brood, an important benefit for f
ounding colonies.   Data are still fragmentary, but it appears that temperature-
adjusted development rates of ants and other social Hymenoptera are quite simila
r.   (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-ARS-CMAVE M-2348.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://eurekamag.com/pdf/007/007432991.pdf   or   h
ttp://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23038\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of diet on the growth of laboratory fire a
nt colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Kansas Entomol. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  62(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  288-291\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of diet on the growth of laboratory 
fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of the Kansas Entomological So
ciety\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Oct 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; scientific; USA; Texas; scientific; diet; colony; growth; invas
ive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Laboratory colonies of the fire ant, Solenopsis
 invicta, were fed one of six diets: 1) sugar-water only, 2) insects only, 3) bo
th insects and sugar-water, 4) and artificial diet, 5) an artificial diet plus i
nsects, and 6) no food.  Colonies with access to both insects and sugar-water gr
ew almost 10-fold by the end of the experiment.  Insects were essential; colonie
s lacking insects ceased brood production entirely.  A sugar source, though not 
essential, was very important.  Growth was reduced by 60% in colonies raised wit
hout sugar-water.  A commonly used artificial diet was not a suitable substitute
 for insect prey.  Even when this diet was supplemented with insects, it was no 
better than insects and sugar-water alone.   (This article was written and prepa
red by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pub
lic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-ARS-CMAVE M-2346.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23041\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The myrmecologist's bible.  (book review of "The a
nts." by H\u246?lldobler, B. and Wilson, E.O.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Am. Scient.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  78\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  461-46\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The myrmecologist's bible.  (book review of 
"The ants." by H\u246?lldobler, B. and Wilson, E.O.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  American Scientist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; book review; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from SDP;\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  8.6 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Porter-1990(M-2373).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23042\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Overview\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Jaffe, K. and Cedeno, A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Applied myrmecology: a world perspective\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder, CO\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  187-189\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Overview\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex lobicornis; Anoplol
epis; Atta cephalotes; Atta insularis; Atta laevigata; Atta texana; Camponotus; 
Iridomyrmex humilis; Monomorium pharaonis; Paratrechina fulva; Paratrechina long
icornis; Pheidole megacephala; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Wasmanni
a auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; U
SA; South America; review; biology; colony founding; ecology; population; commun
ity; predator; parasite; symbiont; myrmecophile; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant bibli
ography; from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2391.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23044\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Thermoregulation in the fire ant, Solenopsis invic
ta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Veeresh, G.K., Mallik, B. and Viraktamath, C.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Social insects and the environment\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  New Delhi, India\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Oxford & IBH Publ. Co. Pvt. Ltd.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  660\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Thermoregulation in the fire ant, Solenopsis
 invicta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; temperature; ecology; mound; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2245.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23046\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Origins of new queens in polygyne red imported fir
e ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Entomol. Sci.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  26(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  474-478\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  01 October 1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Origins of new queens in polygyne red import
ed fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Entomological Science\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.18474/0749-8004-26.4.474\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; mating; flight; polygyny; disp
ersal; marking; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Polygyne colonies of the fire ant, S. invicta, 
accepted newly mated queens both from their own colony and unrelated colonies.  
Only a small fraction of the marked winged queens and newly mated queens were su
ccessful in joining test colonies in the field.  None of the founding queens wer
e accepted into test colonies.  One marked colony queen switched colonies.   (Th
is article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official t
ime, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2526.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter-1991(M-2526).pdf   or pdf available through  https://meridia
n.allenpress.com/jes/article/26/4/474/75072/Origins-of-New-Queens-in-Polygyne-Re
d-Imported?searchresult=1 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23048\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Frequency and distribution of polygyne fire ants (
Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  75(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  248-257\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  26 June 1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Frequency and distribution of polygyne fire 
ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   doi:10.2307/34956
27\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, May 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; biology; colony 
size; polygyny; monogyny; fat; ecology; distribution; population; mound; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In order to determine the frequency and distrib
ution of polygyne and monogyne fire ants (S. invicta) in Florida, preselected si
tes were surveyed from Key West to Tallahassee.  Polygyne colonies were found at
 15% of infested sites - a frequency similar to other states in the southeastern
 United States, but much less than in Texas.  Polygyny was most common in the re
gion around Marion county, but smaller populations were also scattered across th
e state.  The density of mounds at polygyne sites was more than twice that at mo
nogyne sites (262 versus 115 Mounds/ha), although mound diameters were about 20%
 smaller.  Polygyne and monogyne queens averaged the same size (1.42 mm, head wi
dth), but monogyne queens were much heavier (24.3 mg versus 14.4 mg) due to thei
r physogastry.  As expected, workers in polygyne colonies were considerably smal
ler than those in monogyne colonies (0.28 mg versus 0.19 mg, dry fat-free).   (T
his article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official 
time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2583; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/58839/5
6518   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications   or   http://w
ww.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter-1992(M-2583).pdf
   or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter-
1992(M-2583).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23050\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Stability of polygyne and monogyne fire ant popula
tions (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis invicta) in the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  86(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1344-1347\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  October 1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Stability of polygyne and monogyne fire ant 
populations (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis invicta) in the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/86.5.1344\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; North America; Solenopsis invi
cta; Myrmicinae; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; scienti
fic; monogyny; polygyny; physogastry; insemination; distribution; population; ex
otic species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Over the past decade, polygyne red imported fir
e ants (S. invicta Buren) have been found at more and more sites across the sout
heastern United States.  The objective of my study was to determine if polygyne 
(multiple-queen) populations are expanding and at what rate this might be occurr
ing.  More than 200 sites were inspected for polygyny in Florida and several oth
er southeastern states.  These sites were reinspected 1-3 yr later.  Results sho
wed that polygyne populations were not expanding rapidly in the areas studied (i
.e.>4-6% per yr); however, more data will be needed to determine if polygyne pop
ulations are expanding slowly (i.e.1-2% per yr).  Overall, polygyne and monogyne
 sites were about 95% stable from year to year (i.e., they did not commonly swit
ch back and forth from one form to the other).  As expected, average mound densi
ties in the Florida survey (62 sites) remained relatively constant from 1990 to 
1992.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on
 official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2796.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter-1993(M-2796).pdf   or pdf available through  https://academi
c.oup.com/jee/article/86/5/1344/2216082 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23051\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant thermoregulation.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Lenoir, A., Arnold, G. and Lepage, M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Les Insectes Sociaux. 12th Congress of the In
ternational Union for the Study of Social Insects, Paris, Sorbonne, 21-27 August
 1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Paris\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Universit\u233? Paris Nord\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  69\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant thermoregulation.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; brood tending; season; thermoregulati
on; thermal regulation; temperature; thermal optima; behavior; mound building; t
racking; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 96; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2934.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47338\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential use of Pseudacteon phorid flies as fire 
ant biocontrol agents.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 95, In: S.B. Vinson and B. M. Drees [comp
ilers], Proceedings of the 5th International Pest Ant Symposia and 1995 Annual I
mported Fire Ant Conference, San Antonio, TX, May 2-4, 1995, 217 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential use of Pseudacteon phorid flies as
 fire ant biocontrol agents.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; South America; review; distribution; behavior; defensive p
ostures; defensive behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phorid
ae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta is one
 of the most abundant insect pests in the southeastern United States. With avera
ge densities of 1,500-3,500 ants/m2, these pests are virtually ubiquitous in par
ks, pastures, yards and cultivated fields. Fire ant densities in the United Stat
es are about five times higher than those in South America. Escape from numerous
 natural enemies left behind in South America is a likely explanation for this d
ifference.  At least 18 species of Pseudacteon flies have been found attacking f
ire ants in South America. Each species has a distinctively shaped ovipositor th
at is presumably used in a lock and key fashion to lay eggs on a particular part
 of an ant's body. These flies appear to be common and active throughout most of
 the year, but different species are sometimes more active at different times of
 the day. Most species are broadly distributed across a wide range of habitats a
nd climates.  The maggots of at least one and probably all Pseudacteon species d
evelop in the heads of fire ant workers. Larval development takes about 2-3 week
s. Just prior to pupation, the third instar maggot appears to release an enzyme 
that dissolves the membranes that hold the exoskeleton together. The maggot then
 proceeds to consume the entire contents of the ant's head, a process that usual
ly results in decapitation of its living host. The headless body is usually left
 with its legs and sting still twitching. The maggot then pushes the mouth parts
 aside and pupates within the empty head capsule positioned so that the anterior
 three segments precisely fill the oral cavity. The remainder of the puparium re
mains unsclerotized and is protected by the head capsule. The workers carry the 
head capsule with the puparium outside shortly after the host is killed. Pupal d
evelopment requires about three weeks.  Fire ant workers are keenly aware of the
 presence of phorid flies. The presence of a single fly usually stops or greatly
 reduces the foraging efforts of hundreds of workers in only a minute or two. As
 soon as a fly appears, many workers will retreat into the exit hole or find cov
er. Other workers will curl into a stereotypical c-shaped defensive posture that
 has not been seen except when the ants are under attack by phorid flies. The fl
ies will inhibit fire ant foraging as long as they are present, often for period
s of several hours. Several flies are also sufficient to stop nest construction 
or freeze the activity of entire colonies in laboratory nest trays. The overall 
impact of these flies on fire ant populations is unknown; however, it is suffici
ent to have caused the evolution of a number of phorid-specific defense behavior
s.   All Pseudacteon flies are almost certainly parasites of ants. They have nev
er been reported to attack any other kind of organism, and virtually all phyloge
netically related phorid genera are also ant parasites. Their elaborate oviposit
ors and the adaptations of at least one species for pupation in the head capsule
s of worker ants further supports the conclusion that they are very specialized 
parasites. The Pseudacteon species that attack fire ants appear to be specific t
o fire ants. The host specificity of several parasitic Pseudacteon flies in Sout
h America was tested in the field with 23 species of ants from 13 genera. As exp
ected, these flies were attracted only to Solenopsis fire ants. Further tests ar
e necessary, but these results strongly suggest that Pseudacteon flies will not 
pose an ecological danger, either to other arthropods or to other ant genera if 
they were introduced as natural biological control agents for imported fire ants
 in the United States.  In summary, phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are a 
promising group of biological control agents for fire ants because: 1) they are 
specific in their host preferences, 2) they are broadly distributed across time,
 space, and climate, and 3) their impact on fire ant populations is sufficient t
o have caused the evolution of several phorid-specific defense behaviors. Succes
sful release of these flies would not eradicate imported fire ants, but it might
 tilt the ecological balance in favor of our native ants. If this happens, fire 
ant populations in the United States could be reduced to levels similar to those
 in South America.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government e
mployee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 11.2 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/8/83/1995_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23058\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Accessing "FORMIS: a master bibliography of ant li
terature" on the World Wide Web.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Schwarz, M.P. and Hogendoorn, K.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Social insects at the turn of the millenium. 
 Proceedings of the XIII International Congress of IUSSI, Adelaide Australia, 29
 December 1998 - 3 January 1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Adelaide.  535 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Flinders University Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  377\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Accessing "FORMIS: a master bibliography of 
ant literature" on the World Wide Web.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; scientific; bibliography; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 00; from PSW;\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publi
cations/Porter-1999(M-3312).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23059\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology and behavior of Pseudacteon decapitating f
lies (Diptera: Phoridae) that parasitize Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Form
icidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  81(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  292-309\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology and behavior of Pseudacteon decapita
ting flies (Diptera: Phoridae) that parasitize Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera
: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   doi:10.2307/34959
20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-9, Aug 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; For
mica; Lasius; Linepithema; Liometopum; Myrmica; Neivamyrmex; Solenopsis geminata
; Solenopsis interrupta; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis m
egergates; Solenopsis quinquecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima;
 Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Europe; Netherlan
ds; North America; Costa Rica; Honduras; USA; Florida; Texas; South America; Arg
entina; Brazil; review; scientific; biology; colony; ecology; distribution; comm
unity structure; biogeography; community ecology; population density; behavior; 
foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; life hi
story; parasitoids; parasites; parasitism; host parasite relationships; decapita
tion; host specificity; life cycle; mating behavior; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudact
eon affinis; Pseudacteon antiguensis; Pseudacteon arcuatus; Pseudacteon bifidus;
 Pseudacteon bispinosus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon browni; Pseudacteon
 comatus; Pseudacteon convexicauda; Pseudacteon crawfordi; Pseudacteon cultellat
us; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon dentiger; Pseudacteon formicarum; Pseudact
eon grandis; Pseudacteon lenkoi; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon longicauda; 
Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pra
dei; Pseudacteon nr. pradei; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; Pseudacteon spatulatus; P
seudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; impact; ecological; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Larvae of phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon
 have the unusual habit of decapitating fire ant workers and pupating inside the
 empty head capsule which they use as a pupal case.  Flies in this genus are the
 subject of considerable interest because they have the potential of being used 
as classical biological control agents against imported fire ants in North Ameri
ca.  This paper details what is known and not known about their interesting life
 history, attack behavior, mating behavior, host specificity, and impacts on fir
e ant behavior.  The biogeography, community structure, and possible impacts on 
fire ant populations are also considered.  *[Includes lots of unpublished inform
ation.  Pseudacteon have only been reported as parasites of ants.  Only a few sp
ecies attack the non-Solenopsis genera listed.  Pseudacteon that attack fire ant
s are only associated with S. geminata, S. invicta, S. richteri, or S. saevissim
a.  S. interrupta, S. macdonaghi, S. megergates, or S. quinquecuspis have never 
been reported to be attacked by any Pseudacteon.   (This article was written and
 prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in t
he public domain.)                    ***The Pseudacteon sp. B, Table 1, listed 
here are really a new species, Pseudacteon bifidus, according to Brown, B.V., & 
L.W. Morrison, 1999, New Pseudacteon (Diptera: Phoridae) from North America that
 parasitizes the native fire ant Solenopsis geminata (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), 
Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 92: 308-311.***]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 98; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3281; from NAL'S AGRICOLA.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.5 MB  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe81p292.pdf   or
   http://cro.ots.ac.cr/rdmcnfs/datasets/biblioteca/pdfs/nbina-7621.pdf   or 3.6
 MB  https://www.antwiki.org/wiki/images/c/c4/Porter%2C_S._D._%281998.pdf    or 
1.5 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter-
1998(M-3281).pdf   or in this 5.2 MB file http://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF/00/
09/88/13/00044/Binder1.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23060\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host-specific attraction of Pseudacteon flies (Dip
tera: Phoridae) to fire ant colonies in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  81(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  423-429\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host-specific attraction of Pseudacteon flie
s (Diptera: Phoridae) to fire ant colonies in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   doi:10.2307/34959
32\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific;
 colony; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; host specificity; host 
preferences; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pse
udacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; nontar
get organisms; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon fly host-specificity tests were con
ducted in the field in southeastern Brazil with Solenopsis fire ants in the saev
issima and geminata complexes.  These parasitic flies showed a strong preference
 for fire ants in the saevissima complex.  No Pseudacteon flies were attracted t
o three S. geminata (F.) colonies when they were set out in trays, but many flie
s were quickly attracted to three trays with saevissima complex colonies when th
ey were set out between the S. geminata colonies.  Even when both species of ant
s were placed together side by side, more than 99% of flies hovered over trays w
ith saevissima complex ants.  When all of the saevissima colonies were removed, 
leaving only the S. geminata colonies available, about 95% of flies flew away.  
Several flies, however, did transfer to the S. geminata colonies for a few minut
es and at least one fly (P. wasmanni) attacked a few S. geminata workers.  Altog
ether, 588 parasitized workers were collected from the saevissima complex coloni
es compared to 12 from the S. geminata colonies. Two hundred-sixty-two flies eme
rged from the saevissima complex colonies (52% P. tricuspis Borgmeier, 39% P. li
toralis Borgmeier, 4.6% P. wasmanni Schmitz, 2.7% P. pradei Borgmeier, 0.4% P. c
urvatus Borgmeier).  No adult flies emerged from the S. geminata colonies.  Thes
e results demonstrate that P. tricuspis and P. litoralis are highly specific to 
saevissima complex fire ants and strongly indicate that they would pose little t
hreat to native fire ants should they be released as biocontrol agents for impor
ted fire ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 98; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/74845/7
2503   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Por
ter-1998(M-3282).pdf   or in this 5.2 MB file http://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF
/00/09/88/13/00044/Binder1.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47414\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field release of phorid flies for fire ant biocont
rol.  [title only]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 136, In: Shanklin, D. et al. (Comp.), Pro
ceedings of the 1998 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 6-8, 1998, Hot
 Springs, Arkansas, 199 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field release of phorid flies for fire ant b
iocontrol.  [title only]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; D
iptera; Phoridae; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 11.5 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/3/38/1998_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23061\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Book Review: Taber, S.W., 1998, The world of the h
arvester ants, Texas A&M University Press, 213 p\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  82\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  375-376\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Book Review: Taber, S.W., 1998, The world of
 the harvester ants, Texas A&M University Press, 213 p\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Jun 03; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Ephebomyrmex; Pogonomyrmex; My
rmicinae; North America; South America; book review; biology; morphology; taxono
my; key; ecology; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CM
AVE M-3417.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/74904/7
2562 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23065\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity and risk assessment of releasing 
the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon curvatus, as a classical biocontrol agent for 
imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  19(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  35-47\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity and risk assessment of rele
asing the decapitating fly, Pseudacteon curvatus, as a classical biocontrol agen
t for imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1006/bcon.2000.0843\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Campon
otus impressus; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster minutissima; Crematogaster
 pilosa; Dorymyrmex bureni; Dorymyrmex smithi; Forelius pruinosus; Lasius neonig
er; Leptothorax pergandei; Linepithema humile; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole d
iversipilosa; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole megacephala; Pheidole morrisi; Pseudomy
rmex ejectus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Tetram
orium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrm
icinae; Attini; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Arizona; California; Flori
da; Oklahoma; Texas; South America; Argentina; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophil
e; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Apocephalus; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon
 curvatus; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon onyx; Pseuda
cteon spatulatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; parasitoid; classical biocontrol; host 
preference; host specificity; risk assessment; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of the decapitating fly Pseuda
cteon curvatus was studied to determine if this species is suitable for release 
as a classical biocontrol agent of imported fire ants in the United States.  A s
eries of no-choice tests with 19 species of ants from 12 genera showed that P. c
urvatus will not develop in ants outside the genus Solenopsis.  P. curvatus succ
essfully parasitized the native fire ants Solenopsis geminata and Solenopsis xyl
oni in no-choice tests, but rates of parasitism were considerably less than thos
e with the imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta (6% and 35% of the rate for S. i
nvicta, respectively).  Paired preference tests showed that P. curvatus has a 3-
 to 4-fold preference for S. invicta over either of the native fire ants.  Furth
ermore, flies reared from native fire ants still strongly preferred imported fir
e ants.  P. curvatus was not attracted to vegetables, fruits, meat, prepared foo
ds, carrion, or dung.  This study indicates that release of P. curvatus will pos
e only a small risk to native fire ants.  The argument is made that this risk ne
eds to be balanced against potential benefits to numerous other native organisms
 and a high probability that release of this fly would actually benefit native f
ire ants because impacts on imported fire ants would almost certainly be much gr
eater than those on native fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared b
y U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public d
omain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r   http://hdl.handle.net/10113/6119   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sites/firean
ts/publications/BC19_35.pdf   or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Porter-2000(M-3517).pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Us
erFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter-2000(M-3517).pdf   or   https://eurek
amag.com/pdf/003/003464934.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32955\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta - yes, Solenopsis wagneri - no!
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 131, In: D. Suiter, et al., [compiliers],
 Proceedings of the 2002 Imported Fire Ant Conference, 24-26 March 2002, Athens,
 GA, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta - yes, Solenopsis wagneri
 - no! [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 wagneri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; scientific; taxonomy; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *S. wagneri = S. invicta, [S. wagneri has been 
supressed in favor of S. invicta, Anon. 2001.]                  In December 1997
, Steven O. Shattuck, Sanford D. Porter and Daniel P. Wojcik formally applied to
 the International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature to conserve the name So
lenopsis invicta and suppress the name Solenopsis wagneri for the Red Imported F
ire Ant. That application was published in March 1999. In September 1999, Drs. W
alter R. Tschinkel, Edward O. Wilson, and S. B. Vinson wrote in support of this 
application and Stephen W. Taber wrote in opposition. In June 2001, the Commissi
on formally approved this application by a 20-2 vote. Editors and others unaware
 of this decision should be referred to: International Commission of Zoologicd N
omenclature.  2001. Opinion 1976. Solenopsis invicta Buren 1972.(Insecta, Hymeno
ptera): specific name conserved.  Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature 58: 156-15
7.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on of
ficial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3953.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or in this 10.7 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/a/a6/2002_I
FA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32548\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A simple design for a rain-resistant pitfall trap\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  52(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  201-203\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  May 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A simple design for a rain-resistant pitfall
 trap\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00040-004-0783-8\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Oct 05; PDF-1, May 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; methods; pitfall trap; collecting; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Heavy rain causes major problems with using pit
fall traps to collect ants and other surface-active arthropods. A simple design 
for a rain-resistant pitfall trap is described. The trap is constructed by grind
ing a hole in the side of a plastic vial and then covering it with fine-gage wir
e screen. This hole allows excess water to drain out the side of the trap. A met
hod for quickly setting small-diameter pitfalls into the ground with an auger an
d a battery-powered drill is also described.   (This article was written and pre
pared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the p
ublic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-4000.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://hdl.handle.net/10113/3660   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserF
iles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter-2005(M-4000).pdf   or   http://www.sprin
gerlink.com/content/r8q820622w151802/fulltext.pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.g
ov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=3660&content=PDF   or pdf available through http://na
ldc.nal.usda.gov/catalog/3660 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 46912\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2010\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution of the Formosa strain of the fire ant
 decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) three and a half year
s after releases in North Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  93(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  107-112\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2010\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution of the Formosa strain of the fi
re ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) three and a hal
f years after releases in North Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/024.093.0114\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; distributio
n; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon 
curvatus; biocontrol; strains; biotypes; population density; geographical distri
bution; surveys; range expansion; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The Formosa biotype of the decapitating fly Pse
udacteon curvatus Borgmeier was released and successfully established as a self-
sustaining biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta Bure
n at several sites around Gainesville, FL in 2003. In order to determine the sta
tus of these releases, 59 sites were surveyed for flies in the fall of 2006 with
 sticky traps and aspirators. Results of this survey showed that the flies had e
xpanded outward an average of 74 km and occupied more than 30,000 km2 in North C
entral Florida. This rate of expansion was faster than rates reported for Pseuda
cteon tricuspis Borgmeier in Florida, Louisiana, and Texas. The rapid rates of e
xpansion and high densities reported for the Formosa biotype of P. curvatus indi
cate that it is a vigorous parasitoid which will require relatively fewer field 
releases to establish it as biocontrol agent of red imported fire ants in the Un
ited States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employe
e(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=40205&content=PDF  or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615101
5/publications/Porter-2010(M-5019).pdf   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1
653/024.093.0114   or   https://bioone.org/journals/florida-entomologist/volume-
93/issue-1/024.093.0114/Distribution-of-the-Formosa-Strain-of-the-Fire-Ant-Decap
itating/10.1653/024.093.0114.full   or   https://pubag.nal.usda.gov/download/402
05/PDF   or   https://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/40205/PDF   or pdf available t
hrough  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/catalog.xhtml?id=40205&start=0&s
earchText=Pseudacteon+curvatus+florida&searchField=&sortField=   or html http://
www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.093.0114 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23063\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and [compiler]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  FORMIS: a master bibliography of ant literature\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Gainesville, FL\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA-ARS, CMAVE\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Number of Pages:}{\f1\fs28  no pagination\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Edition:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  FORMIS: a master bibliography of ant literat
ure\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; bibliography; database; litera
ture; review; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  FORMIS99 is a composite of several ant literatu
re databases. It contains citations for a large fraction of the world's ant lite
rature (almost 29,000 references).  It can be downloaded or searched online:  ht
tp://cmave.usda.ufl.edu/~formis/.  Specialty databases include:  }{\f1\fs28\b Fi
re Ant Literature Database}{\f1\fs28  - (about 2700 citations).  Daniel P. Wojci
k and Sanford D. Porter.  }{\f1\fs28\b Comprehensive Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliograp
hy}{\f1\fs28  - (about 3000 citations).  Harold G. Fowler and F. M. Schlittler. 
 }{\f1\fs28\b Pharaoh Ant Bibliography - }{\f1\fs28 (about 1000 citations).  Kar
en Vail; David F. Williams, Klaus-Peter Berndt,  Wolfdietrich Eichler; Jerzy Wis
niewski. }{\f1\fs28\b  Santschi Ant Bibliography}{\f1\fs28  - (210 citations) Ro
lf E. Meier.  }{\f1\fs28\b RFORMICA- Russian Wood Ant Literature Database}{\f1\fs28 
 - (almost 800 citations) Vladilen E. Kipyatkov, Dmitri S. Malyshev.    }{\f1\fs28\b 
ANTBIB}{\f1\fs28 , A bibliography of ant systematics - (about 8,000 citations) P
hilip S. Ward, Barry Bolton, Steven O. Shattuck, William L. Brown, Jr.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bi
bliography; from Fire Ant Literature Database.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://cmave.usda.ufl.edu/~formis/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23064\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Alonso, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of fire ant decapitating flies (D
iptera: Phoridae) in laboratory oviposition tests\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  92(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  110-114\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Feb. 1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of fire ant decapitating fl
ies (Diptera: Phoridae) in laboratory oviposition tests\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jee/92.1.110\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster fulva; Aphaenoga
ster miamiana; Camponotus floridanus; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Forelius pruinosus
; Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis inv
icta; Solenopsis saevissima; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae;
 North America; USA; Florida; South America; Brazil; scientific; polygyny; monog
yny; behavior; biocontrol; symphile; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae
; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificities of three species of Pseudact
eon decapitating flies (P. litoralis Borgmeier, P. tricuspis Borgmeier, P. wasma
nni Schmitz) were tested in quarantine facilities in Gainesville, Florida, USA. 
 Female flies from Brazil were placed into test trays containing either red impo
rted fire ants (S. invicta Buren), tropical fire ants (S. geminata Forel), or na
tive ants from six other genera (Crematogaster, Pheidole, Aphaenogaster, Neivamy
rmex, Forelius, Camponotus).  Tests lasted 60-90 min.  The three species of flie
s tested were all at least 15 times more likely to attack their natural host, S.
 invicta, than they were to attack the native fire ant, S. geminata.  More than 
200 larvae resulted from numerous attacks on S. invicta workers.  No larvae resu
lted from the few possible attacks on S. geminata or the other species of ants t
hat were tested.  We induced several P. tricuspis to attack a few S. geminata wo
rkers by mixing these workers in with freeze-killed S. invicta workers.  One adu
lt fly emerged from these attacks, demonstrating that P. tricuspis can develop i
n S. geminata workers.  This indicates that field release of P. tricuspis poses 
some risk to native fire ants; however, the extremely low rates of attack on S. 
geminata in the lab and in the field indicate that this risk would be minimal.  
The argument is made that this small risk is acceptable because, among other thi
ngs, native fire ants are under much more risk from expanding populations of imp
orted fire ants than they would be from imported Pseudacteon flies.   (This arti
cle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, an
d is therefore in the public domain.)                                           
  *[Flies collected while attacking S. invicta & S. saevissima in Brazil.  Remai
nder of species tested in the USA.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from-SDP, verified-SDP; from NA
L'S AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_and_Alonso-1999(M-3357).pdf   or pdf available through  http
s://academic.oup.com/jee/article/92/1/110/2216939 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23045\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Bhatkar, A.P., Mulder, R., Vinson, 
S.B. and Clair, D.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution and density of polygyne fire ants (Hy
menoptera: Formicidae) in Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  84(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  866-874\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution and density of polygyne fire an
ts (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Texas\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/84.3.866\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Feb 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific;
 biology; polygyny; population; mound density; foraging; bait; temperature; inva
sive species; native species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Multiple-queen or 'polygyne' S. invicta Buren c
olonies are a serious economic and environmental concern because they occur in m
uch higher densities than the monogyne form.  Polygyne colonies have been found 
at numerous locations in the United States; nevertheless the frequency and distr
ibution of this form is poorly known.  We surveyed almost 700 roadside sites in 
168 Texas counties.  Polygyny was discovered at 54% of the infested sites.  Poly
gyne populations were scattered in a mosaic across Texas.  The frequency of poly
gyny varied somewhat with geographic region, but the pattern was generally unrel
ated to habitat and environmental conditions.  Polygyne sites averaged more than
 twice as many mounds per hectare as monogyne sites.  Populations of monogyne an
d polygyne forms were slightly lower in cooler and in drier portions of the stat
e.  Mounds of both forms were about the same size.  Polygyny was correlated with
 lower rates of sexual production and reduced numbers of native ants.  The high 
frequency of polygyny in Texas indicates that the fire ant problem in the state 
is much greater than previously realized.   (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2494.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_et_al-1991(M-2494).pdf   or pdf available through  https://a
cademic.oup.com/jee/article/84/3/866/2215635 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23016\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Bowers, M.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Emigration of an Atta colony\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biotropica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  12(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  232\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Emigration of an Atta colony\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biotropica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta columbica; Myrmicinae; At
tini; North America; Panama; colony movement; emigration; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP; verified-SDP; Part of th
e Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r     http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter_an
d_Bowers-1980(M-2360).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23020\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Bowers, M.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Caste partitioned survivorship and route fidelity 
of leaf-cutting ant workers.  [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Breed, M.D., Michener, C.D. and Evans, H.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  The biology of social insects. Proceedings of
 the Ninth Congress of the IUSSI, Boulder, Colorado, August, 1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder, CO.  419 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  254\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Caste partitioned survivorship and route fid
elity of leaf-cutting ant workers.  [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Apr 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta colombica; Myrmicinae; At
tini; North America; Panama; scientific; caste; worker size; worker longevity; r
oute fidelity; survivorship; polymorphism; population; refuse; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant bibli
ography; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23066\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoid-host matching between the little decapi
tating fly Pseudacteon curvatus from Las Flores, Argentina and the black fire an
t Solenopsis richteri\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  83(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  422-427\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoid-host matching between the little 
decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus from Las Flores, Argentina and the black f
ire ant Solenopsis richteri\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Florida; Mississippi; South America; Argentina; scientific; hybrid; symbiont; m
yrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; host preference;
 biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Matching potential biocontrol agents to target 
host populations can greatly improve the success of biological control efforts. 
 This study was designed to determine if the fly P. curvatus Borgmeier from Las 
Flores, Buenos Aires Provence, Argentina prefers its natural host the black fire
 ant S. richteri Forel.  Preferences for S. richteri from Argentina, S. richteri
 from the United States, and hybrid (S. richteri x S. invicta) fire ants from th
e United States were almost the same (~70%) when tested against S. invicta from 
the United States (~30%).  The time to pupation of developing parasitoids was 10
% and 21% longer in hybrid and red fire ants than in black fire ants.  Parasitis
m rates, however, were not significantly different among these ant hosts in no-c
hoice parasitism tests.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Governm
ent employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from-SDP; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3549.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_and_Briano-2000(M-3549).pdf   or   https://journals.flvc.org
/flaent/article/view/74908/72566   or pdf available through  https://journals.fl
vc.org/flaent/article/view/74908 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 57610\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Calcaterra, L.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dispersal and competitive impacts of a third fire 
ant decapitating fly (Pseudacteon obtusus) established in North Central Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  64(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  66-74\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  January 2013; Available online 16 October 2012\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dispersal and competitive impacts of a third
 fire ant decapitating fly (Pseudacteon obtusus) established in North Central Fl
orida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2012.09.018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-35, Oct 13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; scientific; competitive exclusion; competitive displacement; coexistence; symb
iont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudac
teon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; expansion rates; introduced spe
cies; invasive species; intra-guild competition; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Self-sustaining classical biological control ag
ents offer hope for permanent wide-area control of imported Solenopsis fire ants
 in the United States because escape from abundant natural enemies left behind i
n Argentina is a likely reason for unusually high fire ant densities in the Unit
ed States. The fire ant decapitating fly Pseudacteon obtusus Borgmeier (Diptera:
 Phoridae) was released as a biocontrol agent of the red imported fire ant (Sole
nopsis invicta Buren) in Gainesville, FL because it is a common parasitoid of th
is ant in Argentina and because it has a higher propensity of attacking fire ant
s along foraging trails than the two Pseudacteon species previously released. Fi
eld surveys of a rapidly expanding P. obtusus population (8-12 km/yr) proved tha
t this fly was capable of thriving and successfully competing with the much more
 abundant Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier. However, Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmei
er, the first decapitating fly released, was effectively excluded from most samp
le sites when faced with competition from both P. curvatus and the similar-sized
 P. obtusus. Despite clear evidence for competitive exclusion, P. tricuspis abun
dance at sample sites was positively correlated with the abundance of its two co
mpetitors - - probably because of moderate to strong covariability in the suitab
ility of sample sites for all three congeners. The addition of P. curvatus, the 
second parasitoid released, increased total parasitism pressure on fire ant popu
lations by about 10-fold. The addition of P. obtusus, the third species, did not
 measurably improve total guild parasitism rates on imported fire ants in North 
Central Florida (as assessed by roadside trap counts), but the performance of th
is species will likely vary with habitat, region, and climate.   (This article w
as written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is 
therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from NAL\u8217?s AGRICOLA; from
 Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_and_Calcaterra-2013(M-5362).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23021\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Eastmond, D.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Euryopis coki (Theridiidae), a spider that preys o
n Pogonomyrmex ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Arachnol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  10(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  275-277\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Euryopis coki (Theridiidae), a spider that p
reys on Pogonomyrmex ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Arachnology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomy
rmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; behavior; attac
k behavior; predator; Araneae; Theridiidae; spider; Euryopis coki; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[E. coki appears to be a fairly important pred
ator of P. owyheei in southern Idaho, especially in late July & early August.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from SDP; ver
ified-SDP; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r     http://www.americanarachnology.org/JoA_free/JoA_v10_n3/JoA_v10_p275.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23054\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Fowler, H.G., Campiolo, S. and Pesq
uero, M.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of several Pseudacteon (Diptera: 
Phoridae) parasites of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  78(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  70-75\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of several Pseudacteon (Dip
tera: Phoridae) parasites of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in South Americ
a\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex rugosus; Atta sexde
ns; Camponotus; Camponotus abdominalis; Camponotus angulatus; Camponotus blandus
; Camponotus rufipes; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Ectatomma quadridens; Monomoriu
m pharaonis; Myrmelachista autori; Odontomachus brunneus; Odontomachus haematodu
s; Odontomachus minutus; Pachycondyla striata; Paratrechina; Paratrechina longic
ornis; Pheidole; Pheidole oxyops; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis saevissima; Do
lichoderinae; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; South Ame
rica; Brazil; scientific; distribution; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Dipter
a; Phoridae; Myrmosicarius grandicornis; Pseudacteon borgmeieri; Pseudacteon cur
vatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudac
teon wasmanni; host specificity; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We tested the host specificity of several paras
itic Pseudacteon scuttle flies in South America with 23 species of ants in 13 ge
nera.  None of these ant species attracted parasitic Pseudacteon parasites excep
t S. saevissima (F.Smith) and to a lesser extent S. geminata (Fab.).  This resul
t is encouraging because it indicates that Pseudacteon flies tested in this stud
y would not pose an ecological danger to other ant genera if these flies were in
troduced into the United States as classical biological control agents of import
ed fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employ
ee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. gr
andicornis on Atta sexdens; all Pseudacteon spp. on Solenopsis spp.; 2 unidentif
ied phorids appeared to be attracted to a Paratrechina sp. colony]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 95; from SDP; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; 
from leaf-cutting Ant Literature Database; from Fire Ant Literature Database; ve
rified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2915; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/74663/7
2321   or in this file http://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF/00/09/88/13/00005/Bind
er3.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/
Porter_et_al-1995(M-2915).pdf   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.ed
u/flaent/issue/view/3552   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/fla
ent/article/view/74663 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23039\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Fowler, H.G. and MacKay, W.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A comparison of fire ant population densities in N
orth and South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Veeresh, G.K., Mallik, B. and Viraktamath, C.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Social insects and the environment\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  New Delhi, India\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Oxford & IBH Publ. Co. Pvt. Ltd.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  623-624\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A comparison of fire ant population densitie
s in North and South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 saevissima; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; scientific; ecology;
 mound; population density; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2246.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23047\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Fowler, H.G. and Mackay, W.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant mound densities in the United States and 
Brazil (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  85(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1154-1161\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Aug. 1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant mound densities in the United State
s and Brazil (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jee/85.4.1154\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Feb 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 invicta x richteri hybrid; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis pusillignis; Myrmi
cinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; Alabama; Mississippi; Louisiana; So
uth America; Brazil; Mato Grosso do Sul; scientific; biology; colony size; polyg
yny; monogyny; caste; physiology; ecology; distribution; population; mound; abun
dance; behavior; foraging; bait; invasion; biological release; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  To compare fire ant populations (Solenopsis) in
 North and South America, we surveyed 102 preselected roadside sites, half in th
e southeastern United States and half in the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil
.  Fire ants were considerably more abundant in the United States.  They occurre
d at more sites (100 versus 70%), in higher densities (170 versus 30 mounds/ha),
 in larger mounds (27.0 versus 13.8 liters), and they constituted a larger fract
ion of the local ant community (97 versus 13% of occupied baits).  These data ar
e consistent with the hypothesis that North American populations of S. invicta h
ave escaped natural biological control; however, cultural and climatic factors a
re also likely explanations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Go
vernment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2590.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB  https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/603605
10/publications/Porter_et_al-1992(M-2590).pdf   or 1 MB http://jee.oxfordjournal
s.org/content/jee/85/4/1154.full.pdf   or 1 MB pdf available through  https://ac
ademic.oup.com/jee/article/85/4/1154/2215906 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 64768\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Gavilanez-Slone, J.M. and Valles, S
.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2016\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: infection tests with a
dult honey bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  99(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  729-733\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 2016\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: infection tests 
with adult honey bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.099.0424\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-52, Jan 17\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Sol
enopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; host-specificity tests; biocontrol; host range;
 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) is a positi
ve sense, single-stranded RNA virus that has considerable potential as a self-su
staining or classical biocontrol agent against the invasive fire ant Solenopsis 
invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) because it can cause substantial mortali
ty in colonies of this species. Based on extensive host specificity tests with o
ther ants, we predicted that SINV-3 would not infect the honey bee, Apis mellife
ra L. (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Nevertheless, because of the economic importance of
 honey bees, it was necessary to confirm this prediction before proceeding with 
field release of SINV-3 into regions where it does not yet occur. To test our pr
ediction, we 1) examined field bees for the presence of the virus, 2) conducted 
specific searches of the GenBank databases for sequences (amino acid and nucleot
ide) with identity to SINV-3, and 3) inoculated laboratory groups of honey bees 
with large doses of SINV-3. SINV-3 was not detected in field bees or in GenBank 
libraries associated with honey bees, Apoidea, or non-host Insecta generally. We
stern blot analysis for SINV-3 capsid proteins showed that viral proteins were n
ot produced in inoculated honey bees, but were produced in inoculated fire ants.
 Furthermore, qPCR analysis revealed no significant increase in SINV-3 quantity 
in honey bees, beyond the inoculating dose, whereas virus quantity dramatically 
increased over time in inoculated fire ants. Based on these results, we conclude
 that field release of SINV-3 as a biocontrol agent against red imported fire an
ts in regions without the virus would pose little or no threat to honey bees.   
(This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on officia
l time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 17; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/88137/8
6112   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.099.0424   or pdf availabl
e through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/88137   or html http://ww
w.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.099.0424 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32547\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Assessing host specificity and field release poten
tial of fire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Van Driesche, R.G., Murray, T. and Reardon, R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Assessing host ranges for parasitoids and pre
dators used for classical biological control: a guide to best practice\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Morgantown, West Virginia\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  FHTET-2004-03, USDA Forest Service\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  152-176\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Assessing host specificity and field release
 potential of fire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Feb 05, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster; Camponotus; Cre
matogaster; Dorymyrmex; Forelius; Lasius; Leptothorax; Linepithema; Neivamyrmex;
 Odontomachus; Pheidole; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis daguerrei; Solenopsis geminata
; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis xyl
oni; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Tetramorium; Trachymyrmex; Dolichoder
inae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; N
orth America; USA; Alabama; Florida; South Carolina; Texas; South America; Argen
tina; Brazil; review; biology; colony; ecology; distribution; community structur
e; biogeography; community ecology; population density; behavior; foraging; atta
ck behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite life history; parasito
ids; parasites; parasitism; host parasite relationships; decapitation; host spec
ificity; life cycle; mating behavior; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon borgmeieri;
 Pseudacteon cultellatus; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacte
on nocens; Pseudacteon nudicornis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon nr. obtusus;
 Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; pathogen; Micr
osporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimorpha invic
tae; impact; ecological; biocontrol; released agents; introduced agents; choice 
tests; field tests; feeding preference tests; risk assessment; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant populations in their South American ho
melands are about 1/5 to 1/10 of populations normally found in North America. Th
is intercontinental difference in fire ant densities is not explained by differe
nces in climate, habitat, soil type, land use, plant cover, or sampling protocol
s. Escape from numerous natural enemies left behind in South America is the most
 apparent explanation for the intercontinental population differences. Classical
 or self-sustaining biocontrol agents are currently the only current hope for pe
rmanent regional control of fire ants. Successful release of biocontrol agents w
ill not eradicate imported fire ants, but it could help tilt the ecological bala
nce in favor of native ants. If this happened, fire ant populations in the Unite
d States could be reduced to levels similar to those in South America. Fire ant 
decapitating flies in the genus Pseudacteon are being evaluated for fire ant bio
control. This chapter was written by a scientist at the USDA-ARS, Center for Med
ical, Agricultural and Veterinary Entomology in Gainesville, Florida and a scien
tist at Brackenridge Field Laboratory and the Section of Integrative Biology, Un
iversity of Texas at Austin. The chapter was written to discusses the biology of
 fire ant decapitating flies and detail the process of studying their host speci
ficity and evaluating potential risks and benefits associated with their field r
elease. The chapter discusses how information on host range from the literature,
 field observations, field tests, no-choice tests and choice tests was used to e
valuate the environmental safety of releasing decapitating flies in the field as
 fire ant biocontrol agents. Results of these tests predicted that that fire ant
 decapitating flies would be very host specific and would present no danger to a
nything except for fire ants. Post-release host range tests have so far confirme
d the pre-release predictions.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. 
Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3935.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  2 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615
1015/publications/Porter_and_Gilbert-2004(M-3935).pdf   or   }{\f1\fs28\ul http:
//www.invasive.org/hostrange/ch13.pdf}{\f1\fs28    or 2 MB http://www.invasivefo
restinsectandweedbiocontrol.info/fact_sheets/documents/wholehostrangebookpdf.pdf
   or 0.9 MB  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5e76/2289a1daa95ff65c756544596dc8
624d5a4b.pdf   or the whole book 3.2 MB }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.fs.fed.us/fores
thealth/technology/pdfs/HostRangeBook.pdf}{\f1\fs28    or the whole book 3.2 MB 
 http://forestpestbiocontrol.info/fact_sheets/documents/wholehostrangebookpdf.pd
f   or the whole book 3.2 MB  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Karien_Dekker
/publication/46667703_Conclusions/links/02e7e531480ec959c6000000.pdf#page=158 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33899\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Strategies for assessing the host specificity of f
ire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Second International Symposium on Biological 
Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005. Scientic Program, Friday 16 Sept. 
2005, Session 13, 11:35\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Davos, Switzerland\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  81\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Strategies for assessing the host specificit
y of fire ant decapitating flies (Phoridae: Pseudacteon)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Jun 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Jun 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; behavio
r; foraging; attack behavior; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; d
ecapitation; host specificity; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; biocontrol; relea
sed agents; introduced agents; choice tests; field tests; feeding preference tes
ts; host range testing; fly biotypes; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-4008.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or in this 2.4 MB file http://www.bugwood.org/arthropod2005/vol2/13b.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 43928\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoid case history: An evaluation of methods 
used to assess host ranges of fire ant decapitating flies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Hoddle, M.E. and complier\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Second International Symposium on Biological 
Control of Arthropods; September 12-16, 2005, Davos, Switzerland\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Forest Health Technology Enterprise Team
, Morgantown, WV, USA\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA, Forest Service; FHTET-2005-08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Number of Volumes:}{\f1\fs28  3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  634-650\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasitoid case history: An evaluation of me
thods used to assess host ranges of fire ant decapitating flies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Jun 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Jun 06; PDF-1, Sep 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s richteri; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Solenopsis invicta x richteri
 hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Mississippi; South Ca
rolina; Tennessee; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; biology; dis
tribution; behavior; species specific alarm pheromone; foraging; attack behavior
; aggression; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; decapitation; host specificit
y; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon o
btusus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; released agents; introduced agents; n
o-choice tests; choice tests; sequential no-choice tests; field tests; feeding p
reference tests; host range testing; biotypes; cryptic species; nontarget specie
s; naive females; experienced females; large females; alternate hosts; ovipositi
on; test chambers; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The first three papers in this section have dis
cussed factors that affect the efficiency and success of laboratory host range t
ests. This paper presents an evaluation of how well those factors applied to our
 investigations of host ranges of fire ant decapitating flies in the genus Pseud
acteon (Diptera: Phoridae). We initially discuss the nature of the fire ant prob
lem (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis spp.) and the need for effective self-s
ustaining biological control agents. We briefly review the biology of Pseudacteo
n decapitating flies, the overall results of our host range tests, and the curre
nt status of field releases of these biological control agents. We conclude by d
iscussing how well the recommendations of the three initial papers about 1) stat
istical procedures, 2) biotypes and cryptic species, and 3) experimental design,
 plus a recent book on the subject of host range testing, apply to our experienc
es with fire ant decapitating flies.   (This article was written and prepared by
 U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public do
main.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-4049.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_and_Gilbert-2005(M-4049).pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/
sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter_and_Gilbert-2005(M-4049).pdf   o
r 2.4 MB file  http://www.fs.fed.us/foresthealth/technology/pdfs/2ndSymposiumArt
hropods05_08V2.pdf   or in this 2.9 MB file  http://www.bugwood.org/arthropod200
5/vol2/13b.pdf    or pdf available through http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifa
hi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48152\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Gilbert, L.E., Johnson, S.J., Graha
m, L.C., Horton, P.M. and Lockley, T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Release and establishment of the fire ant decapita
ting fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, in the southeastern United States.  [poster pap
er]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 114, In: L. Greenberg & C. Lerner [ed.], 
Proceedings of the 2003 Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 30-April 1, 2003
, Palm Springs, CA, 145 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Release and establishment of the fire ant de
capitating fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, in the southeastern United States.  [post
er paper]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2003_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississipp
i; North Carolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee Texas; scientific; symbio
nt; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Psuedacteon tricuspis; biocontr
ol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 21 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/0/03/2003_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 50770\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Graham, L.C., Johnson, S.J., Thead,
 L.G. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2011\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The large decapitating fly Pseudacteon litoralis (
Diptera: Phoridae) successfully established on fire ant populations in Alabama\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  94(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  208-213\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 20111\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The large decapitating fly Pseudacteon litor
alis (Diptera: Phoridae) successfully established on fire ant populations in Ala
bama\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/   or   doi:10.1653/024.0
94.0213\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-25, Sep 11\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; South America; Argentina; scientific; distributio
n; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon 
litoralis; biocontrol; strains; biotypes; population density; geographical distr
ibution; surveys; range expansion; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The large fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteo
n litoralis Borgmeier, from northeastern Argentina was successfully released as 
a self-sustaining biocontrol agent of imported fire ants in south central Alabam
a in 2005. Five years later, this fly is firmly established at the original rele
ase site and has expanded outward at least 18 km. Nevertheless, populations rema
in very low considering P. litoralis is one of the most abundant fire ant decapi
tating flies in large areas of its range in South America. The reasons for low d
ensities and why we were only able to establish this fly at 1 of 9 release sites
 in 4 states (2003-2006) are unknown, but problems with host-matching, release p
rocedures, weather conditions, and competition with previously released decapita
ting flies are discussed as possible factors.   (This article was written and pr
epared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the 
public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 12; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe94p208.pdf   or   http:
//www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.094.0213   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/fl
aent/article/view/76324/73983   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/
66151015/publications/Porter_et_al-2011(M-5144).pdf   or in this file  http://uf
dcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF/00/09/88/13/00368/Binder1.pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.
usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=55807&content=PDF   or available through http:/
/handle.nal.usda.gov/10113/55807 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40581\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Higashi, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2008\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  What should Japan be doing about S. invicta? [in J
apanese]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Higashi, S., Ogata, K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Solenopsis invicta, especially beh
avioral ecology and molecular genetics [in Japanese]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Tokyo\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Kaiyusha\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  163-175\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  What should Japan be doing about S. invicta?
 [in Japanese]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Dec 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-13, Dec 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; Asia; Japan; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; Brazil; review; bio
logy; ecology; behavior; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_and_Higashi-2008(M-4306).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23017\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Jorgensen, C.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Recapture studies of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrm
ex owyheei Cole, using a fluorescent marking technique\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecol. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  5\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  263-269\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  August 1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Recapture studies of the harvester ant, Pogo
nomyrmex owyheei Cole, using a fluorescent marking technique\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecological Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1111/j.1365-2311.1980.tb01149.x\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Sep 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Myrmicin
ae; North America; USA; scientific; mortality; forager; division of labor; route
 fidelity; trunk trail; colony size; longevity; methods; mark-recapture techniqu
e; sampling; fluorescent marking; marking technique; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Mark-recapture sampling must be stratified beca
use populations of foragers and defenders are partitioned by trunk trails and or
der of emergence respectively.  Foragers and defenders form overlapping subsets 
of the total colony population, each of which is correlated with total colony po
pulation size.  Foragers and defenders have an average life expectancy of approx
imately 2 weeks.  The fluorescent marking procedure did not significantly affect
 harvester ant mortality and only temporarily affected their behavior.  Combinat
ions and mixtures of fluorescent ink allow at least.eight groups in a colony to 
be distinctly marked for periods exceeding 4 months.  (abstract provided by auth
or)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP, verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r     http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter_an
d_Jorgensen-1980(M-2362).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23019\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Jorgensen, C.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1981\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foragers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex owyhee
i: a disposable caste?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  247-256\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 1981\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foragers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex 
owyheei: a disposable caste?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/BF00299879\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; foragers; Pogonomyrmex owyheei
; Pogonomyrmex salinus; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; worke
rs; caste; biomass; division of labor; age polyethism; longevity; survivorship; 
total work; behavior; large reservoir; work population; behavior role; methods; 
mark-recapture technique; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Exterior workers of the harvester ant, Pogonomy
rmex owyheei, were subdivided into forager, defender and refuse worker behavior 
roles (Fig. 2).  Exterior workers comprised approximately 16% of the total colon
y population with interior workers comprising the remainder.  An average of less
 than 10% of the total worker population foraged (Table 1).  Studies of role cha
nges confirmed a general one-way progression from interior workers progressed to
ward foraging, their dry weights declined approximately 40% (Fig. 3) and mandibl
e wear increased (Table 2).  Based on these results, we propose that P. owyheei 
has evolved a disposable forager strategy that tolerates high forager mortality.
  The large reservoir of interior workers required by this strategy may also inh
ibit the evolution of physically specialized interior worker castes.   (abstract
 provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from-SDP; verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r   http://www.springerlink.com/content/klm3vt21330l32vj/fulltext.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23037\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Jorgensen, C.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Longevity of harvester ant colonies in southern Id
aho\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Range Manage.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  41(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  104-107\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Longevity of harvester ant colonies in south
ern Idaho\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Range Management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.2307/3898942\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex owyheei; Pogonomy
rmex salinas; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Idaho; scientific; colonies; colon
y longevity; colony persistence; colony survivorship; mound; clearings; plant co
mmunity analysis; environmental impact reporting; rangelands; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Harvester ant colonies (Pogonomyrmex owyheei Co
le) in southern Idaho were monitored periodically for nine-years.  Mortality rat
es indicate that established colonies live 14-30 years (x = 17).  Mounds were co
mmonly reactivated after the death of an old colony; consequently, some may be u
tilized for many decades.  Clearings with active mounds showed almost no change 
after nine years of observations while those without active mounds were rapidly 
filled by annual herbs and then gradually by perennial shrubs.  Harvester ants a
re clearly a very persistent component of cold desert shrub communities.    (abs
tract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP; verified-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.6 MB  https://repository.arizona.edu/bitstream/han
dle/10150/645205/8221-8102-2-PB.pdf?sequence=1 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23043\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Jorgensen, C.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Psammophores: do harvester ants (Hymenoptera: Form
icidae) use these pouches to transport seeds?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Kansas Entomol. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  63(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  138-149\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Psammophores: do harvester ants (Hymenoptera
: Formicidae) use these pouches to transport seeds?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of the Kansas Entomological So
ciety\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex occidentalis; Myr
micinae; North America; USA; Utah; scientific; feeding behavior; foraging; soil 
excavation; benefits; missed opportunity; morphology; psammophores; seed transpo
rt; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pogonomyrmex ants have a psammophore or basket 
of long hairs under their heads which they use for carrying loose soil.  The pre
sence of these hairs or ammochaetae improved the carrying ability of Pogonomyrme
x occidentalis workers and queens by more than 200% for dry soil but provided no
 benefit for damp soil.  Foragers readily used their psammophores to collect sma
ll seeds and particles of cracked wheat from artificial bait piles.  Psammophore
s were profitably used with particles up to 0.8 mm3 or about 1.2 mm diameter.  R
emoval of either the mandibular or subgenal portions of the psammophore signific
antly  reduced carrying ability but did not completely destroy its function.  Po
gonomyrmex workers clearly have the capacity to use their psammophore during for
aging and its use could distinctly improve foraging efficiency; nevertheless, fo
ragers apparently  do not use this pouch under natural conditions.  P. occidenta
lis foragers did not  begin using the psammophore until seed densities were far 
above normal (> 0.5 per cm2) and full loads were only achieved at extremely high
 seed densities (> 10 per cm2).  The main problem was that once a forager accept
ed a food item, no matter how small, it immediately returned directly to the nes
t without searching for a second item.  (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from SDP; verified-SDP; from NAL's
 AGRICOLA; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 58227\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Kumar, V., Calcaterra, L.A., Briano
, J.A. and Seal, D.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Release and establishment of the little decapitati
ng fly Pseudacteon cultellatus (Diptera: Phoridae) on imported fire ants (Hymeno
ptera: Formicidae) in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  96(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1567-1573\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Release and establishment of the little deca
pitating fly Pseudacteon cultellatus (Diptera: Phoridae) on imported fire ants (
Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.096.0440\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-38, Feb 14\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polygyny; colonies; symbiont; myrmeco
phile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon cultellatus; biocontrol; field
 release; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The little decapitating fly Pseudacteon cultell
atus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) from Argentina was released as a self-sustain
ing biological control agent against the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invic
ta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Florida to parasitize small fire ant worke
rs associated with multiple-queen colonies. This fly appears to be established a
t 2 of 5 release sites, but populations still remain very low (\u8804? 1% of tot
al Pseudacteon flies) and localized more than 2 yr after their release. Further 
releases of P. cultellatus in the United States should be limited to a few addit
ional sites in different habitats or climatic regions where this fly might be mo
re successful.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government emplo
yee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.096.0440  
 or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.096.0440 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23062\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Nogueira de S\u225?, L.A., Flanders
, K. and Thompson, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field releases of the decapitating fly, Pseudacteo
n tricuspis.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 102, In: Proceedings of the 1999 Imported
 Fire Ant Conference, March 3-5, 1999, Charleston, South Carolina, 154 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field releases of the decapitating fly, Pseu
dacteon tricuspis.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Oklahoma; scientific; distribu
tion; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontr
ol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies in the genus Pseudacteon are a pro
mising group for biological control of fire ants. Maggots of these miniature fli
es develop in the heads of fire ant workers, decapitating their host upon pupati
on. Fire ant workers are keenly aware of the presence of phorid flies. The prese
nce of a single fly usually stops or greatly inhibits the foraging efforts of hu
ndreds of workers in only a minute or two.  The overall impact of these flies on
 fire ant populations is still unknown; however, it is clearly sufficient to hav
e caused the evolution of a number of phorid-specific defense behaviors. These b
ehaviors could only have evolved if Pseudacteon flies had population-level impac
ts on the survival of fire ant colonies or the production of sexuals.  Our reari
ng techniques have gradually improved over the past year. Our laboratory is curr
ently producing 800-1800 P. tricuspis flies/day and 100-300 P. curvatus flies/da
y. We are cooperating with the ARS laboratory in Starkville, MS to develop ways 
of further automating the process and improving production efficiency. We are pa
rticularly positive about our abilities to rear P. curvatus. Once we are able to
 get this species out of quarantine, we should be able to rear twice as many fli
es as P. tricuspis with half the effort. Having a steady supply of flies has bee
n the key to our current success in releasing P. tricuspis.  Permits to release 
P. tricuspis were granted to our lab in 1997. Three releases were conducted in t
he summer and fall of 1997. Flies have been recovered from one of these sites ev
ery month since October 1997, a period of more than 18 months. During this perio
d the flies survived two winters, a flood, and a severe summer drought. Fly popu
lations at this release site still appear to be increasing as evidenced by the n
umbers of flies observed and the percent of mounds attacked during these observa
tions. These densities are already comparable to those found in South America. I
t will be very interesting to see if populations continue to grow in the coming 
year. The growth and persistence of flies at this site is very important because
 it proves that P. tricuspis can establish self-sustaining and apparently perman
ent populations on the red imported fire ant in the United States.  During the l
ate summer and fall of 1998, flies were released at six additional sites in Flor
ida (3), Alabama (I), Arkansas (1) and Oklahoma (1). Field-reared flies have bee
n consistently recovered from all three of the Florida sites for the last 5-7 mo
nths. Field-reared flies were also recovered from the Arkansas site for two week
s before cold weather set in. Because of the onset of winter, we do not expect t
o recover flies from the remaining sites until spring 1999. We are currently mon
itoring fire ant populations at the release sites and paired control sites. We w
ill begin assessing the impacts of phorid flies on fire ant populations in the n
ext year or two after the fly populations have a chance to build up. We will als
o monitor rates of fly dispersal from the release sites. This information will a
llow us to determine the value of these flies as fire ant biocontrol agents and 
how many release sites we will need in each state to achieve maximum benefits in
 a predetermined amount of time.  Successful releases of these flies and other n
atural enemies will not eradicate imported fire ants, but they could help tilt t
he ecological balance in favor of our native ants. If this happens, fire ant pop
ulations in the United States could be reduced to levels similar to those in Sou
th America..   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employe
e(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 8.3 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/3/32/1999_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32546\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Nogueira de S\u225?, L.A. and Morri
son, L.W.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment and dispersal of the fire ant decapi
tating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis in North Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  29(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  179-188\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  February 2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Establishment and dispersal of the fire ant 
decapitating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis in North Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control: theory and applica
tion in pest management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/S1049-9644(03)00149-X\par }
{\f1\fs28\b PMCID:}{\f1\fs28  9999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, May 05; PDF-10, Sep 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; distribution; mou
nd; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tr
icuspis; classical biological control; release site; dispersal; dispersal rates;
 host preference; establishment; expansion; wind drift; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The decapitating  fly Pseudacteon tricuspis Bor
gmeier was released at eight sites in North Florida between the summer of 1997 a
nd the fall of 1999 as a self-sustaining biocontrol agent of the red imported fi
re ant, Solenopsis invicta.  Several releases used parasitized fire ant workers 
while most involved adult flies released over disturbed ant mounds.  Establishme
nt and dispersal of fly populations were monitored by disturbing about 10 fire a
nt mounds at each site and then inspecting them closely for hovering flies over 
a period of about 30 min.  Overwintering populations of flies were successfully 
established at 6 of 8 release sites.  Over several years, fly populations at the
se sites increased to levels as high or higher than those normally seen in their
 South American homeland.  By the fall of 1999, flies had expanded out 1-6 km fr
om five release sites and occupied about 125 km2.  By the fall of 2000, the five
 initial release sites plus one new site had fused into one large area about 70 
km in diameter.  The flies had expanded out an additional 16-29 km and occupied 
about 3,300 km2.  By the fall of 2001, the flies had expanded out an additional 
10-30 km and occupied approximately 8,100 km2.  Fly dispersal was not related to
 wind patterns in the Gainesville area.  Based on the above rates of dispersal a
nd an establishment rate of 66%, we estimate that a state the size of Florida wo
uld require 5-10 releases spaced over a 3-year period to cover the state in 6-9 
years.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) o
n official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/fireant/publications/BC29_17
9.pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=3442&content=PDF 
  or   http://www.faculty.missouristate.edu/L/LloydMorrison/PDF%20files/Biol.Con
trol(04)29;179-188.pdf   or   http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6615101
5/publications/Porter_et_al-2004(M-3847).pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/do
wnload/3442/PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publi
cations/Porter_et_al-2004(M-3847).pdf pdf available through   http://hdl.handle.
net/10113/3442   or pdf available through http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifah
i-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62290\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Oi, D.H., Valles, S.M. and Vander M
eer, R.K.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mitigating the allergic effects of fire ant enveno
mation with biologically based population reduction\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  13(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  372-378\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Aug. 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mitigating the allergic effects of fire ant 
envenomation with biologically based population reduction\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinica
l Immunology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283624544\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-86, Jul 21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; Asia; China; Taiwan; Australia; North America; USA; South America; review; sti
ng; venom; impact; medical; hypersensitivity; anaphylaxis; allergens; allergic r
eaction; population; biocontrol; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; parasite; micros
poridium; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  PURPOSE OF REVIEW:  To describe the current eff
orts to use biological control agents to reduce fire ant population levels, thus
 ultimately reducing the number of human sting and allergic reaction incidents. 
 RECENT FINDINGS:  Climate change and worldwide fire ant expansion will increase
 the frequency of human encounters and allergenic events, putting additional pre
ssure on the public health sector. Six species of fire ant decapitating flies ar
e now established in the United States. The microsporidium Kneallhazia solenopsa
e is well established and new fire ant hosts have been identified. The fire ant 
virus Solenopsis invicta virus 3 shows good potential for use as an environmenta
lly friendly biopesticide because of its virulence and host specificity.  SUMMAR
Y:  During separate founding events in the United States, Australia, mainland Ch
ina, and Taiwan, fire ants native to South America escaped their native pathogen
s and parasites. Consequently, fire ant populations in these introduced regions 
pose a serious public health threat to the human populations by envenomation and
 subsequent allergic reactions. Specific, self-sustaining biological control age
nts have been discovered, studied, and released into fire ant populations in the
 United States in an effort to re-establish an ecological/competitive balance, r
esulting in reduced fire ant densities and human exposure.   (This article was w
ritten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is ther
efore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through  https://ur.booksc.eu/book/389
20407/be379f \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23067\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Pesquero, M.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Illustrated key to Pseudacteon decapitating flies 
(Diptera: Phoridae) that attack Solenopsis saevissima complex fire ants in South
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  84(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  691-699\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Illustrated key to Pseudacteon decapitating 
flies (Diptera: Phoridae) that attack Solenopsis saevissima complex fire ants in
 South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis saevissima; Myrmici
nae; South America; Brazil; scientific; morphology; female genitalia; taxonomy; 
key; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoids; parasites; Phoridae; host parasite rel
ationships; decapitation; biocontrol; oviposition; host decapitation; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This paper provides an illustrated key in Engli
sh and Portuguese to 18 South American species of Pseudacteon decapitating flies
 that attack Solenopsis fire ants in the saevissima complex.  The taxonomic hist
ory and current status of species in the genus Pseudacteon are discussed.  Pseud
acteon flies are of interest because of their unusual life history and potential
 value as classical fire ant biocontrol agents.   (This article was written and 
prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in th
e public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/75019/7
2677   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   or   http://www.a
rs.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porter_and_Pesquero-2001(M-
3656).pdf  or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view
/75019 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23053\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Pesquero, M.A., Campiolo, S. and Fo
wler, H.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Growth and development of Pseudacteon phorid fly m
aggots (Diptera: Phoridae) in the heads of Solenopsis fire ant workers (Hymenopt
era: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  24(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  475-479\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Growth and development of Pseudacteon phorid
 fly maggots (Diptera: Phoridae) in the heads of Solenopsis fire ant workers (Hy
menoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/24.2.475\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 saevissima; Myrmicinae; South America; Brazil; scientific; biology; colony; beh
avior; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litorali
s; Pseudacteon pradei; Pseudacteon wasmanni; maggot; biocontrol; development; la
rvae; pupae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We studied the growth and development of the pa
rasitic phorid fly P. litoralis Borgmeier in the fire ant S. invicta Buren.  The
 fly apparently lays one egg in or on the thorax of a major worker.  The newly h
atched maggot migrates to the head of the ant where it develops through its last
 2 instars in about 3 wk (23 degreesC).  Just before pupation, an enzyme is appa
rently released that begins dissolving the cuticular membranes of the ant.  The 
maggot then consumes the entire contents of the ant head, a process that usually
 results in decapitation of it living host.  After pushing the mouthparts aside,
 the maggot pupariates within the empty head capsule, positioned so that the ant
erior 3 segments precisely fill the oral cavity.  The pupal stages lasts about 3
 wk.  Results of this study indicate that it should be possible to rear this fly
 for release as a natural biological control agent of imported fire ants in the 
United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government emplo
yee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 95; from SDP; from Fire Ant Literat
ure Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2929.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.5 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/Porter_et_al-1995(M-2929).pdf   or 1.4 MB pdf available thr
ough  https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/24/2/475/423446 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62173\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Plowes, R.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology and host specificity of Pseudacteon bifidu
s a decapitating fly of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 42, In: T. Schowalter, [compilier], Proce
edings of the 2014 Imported Fire Ant and Invasive Pest Ant Conference, New Orlea
ns, LA, USA, April 6-8, 2015, 89 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology and host specificity of Pseudacteon 
bifidus a decapitating fly of the tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata.  [abst
ract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-45, Feb 16, IN: a-2015_Annual_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicina
e; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; symbiont; myrmecophile; paras
itoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bifidus; host-pecificity; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon bifidus is a small decapitating fly
 which attacks tropical fire ants (Solenopsis geminata) in Texas. We have been a
ble to rear this fly on tropical fire ants in Florida for more than 10 generatio
ns. We are currently investigating its suitability as a self-sustaining biocontr
ol agent for tropical fire ants in Guam, Hawaii, and the Galapagos.  Recently co
mpleted hosts-pecificity tests show that this fly is completely specific to fire
 ants in the genus Solenopsis.  Food attraction tests show that this fly does no
t have the potential to become a nuisance pest because it is not attracted to fr
uits, vegetables, carrion, feces, or various prepared foods.    (This article wa
s written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on official time, and is 
therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4 MB file http://articles.extension.org/site
s/default/files/2015%20Conference%20Proceedings_0.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 To access the 1984 - 2015 Proceedings use the following link:  \par }
{\f1\fs28 http://www.extension.org/pages/Proceedings_of_the_Imported_Fire_Ant_Co
nference \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 69378\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Plowes, R.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing and biology of the decapitating fly Pseuda
cteon bifidus (Diptera: Phoridae): a parasitoid of tropical fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  101(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  265-272\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing and biology of the decapitating fly 
Pseudacteon bifidus (Diptera: Phoridae): a parasitoid of tropical fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/024.101.0218  or   http://ww
w.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-65, Oct 18\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicina
e; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; workers; behavior; symbiont; 
myrmecophile; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon bifidus; sex ratios; de
velopment rates; host preferences; biological control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The small decapitating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus
 Brown and Morrison (Diptera: Phoridae), is a parasitoid of the tropical fire an
t, Solenopsis geminata (F.) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). This fly is of interest a
s a potential self-sustaining biocontrol agent because tropical fire ants are in
vasive pests throughout the world's tropics, especially on islands of the Pacifi
c. The objective of this study was to develop methods for mass rearing P. bifidu
s and to study related aspects of its biology. The flies used in this study were
 collected near the Nueces River north of Catarina, Texas, USA. We found that P.
 bifidus parasitizes minor workers with an average head width of 0.71 \u177? 0.1
0 mm (0.59-1.15, range). The sex ratio of adult flies was moderately skewed to m
ales (58:42%), with males slightly more likely to emerge from the smallest hosts
 and females from the largest ones. The average generation time was 30 d at 27.6
 \u176?C. Average larval development time was 14 d at 27.6 \u176?C, but the patt
ern was highly skewed with a mode of 11 d and about 15% of individuals in a long
 tail of slow developing larvae, which extended out to at least 41 d. Male pupae
 emerged faster than female pupae (0.8 d, 23.5 \u176?C). Unlike other Pseudacteo
n species, adult females were not ready to oviposit until 8 to 24 h after eclosu
re. We were able to rear 9,500 \u177? 2,800 flies per generation primarily by mo
difying preexisting rearing procedures (1) to provide adults access to water and
 sugar water so they could live longer, (2) by extending access to hosts for 1 t
o 2 extra d, and (3) by avoiding reuse of host colonies with poor rates of paras
itism. Labor costs were decreased by rearing in discrete generations and the use
 of an attack box with automatic temperature, humidity, lighting, and mechanical
 controls that allowed flies to emerge, mate, and parasitize hosts without the n
eed for constant management. The success of these rearing efforts provided a fou
ndation for subsequent studies of P. bifidus host specificity and host suitabili
ty.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on o
fficial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  2.4 MB  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view
/104397/102155   or 2.1 MB  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.101.0218  
 or pdf available through  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/104397  
 or html  http://www.bioone.org/doi/10.1653/024.101.0218 \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplemental information available through  http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/
entomologist/browse \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 69377\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Plowes, R.M. and Causton, CE.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus
 (Diptera: Phoridae): Host specificity and attraction to potential food items\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  101(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  55-60\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ant decapitating fly, Pseudacteon b
ifidus (Diptera: Phoridae): Host specificity and attraction to potential food it
ems\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/024.101.0111   or   http://w
ww.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-65, Oct 18\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Campon
otus floridanus; Crematogaster laeviuscula; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bure
ni; Nylanderia fulva; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridan
a; Pogonomyrmex badius; Solenopsis aurea; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invict
a; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formic
inae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; North America; USA; California; Florida; Te
xas; scientific; distribution; host range; symbiont; myrmecophile; Diptera; Phor
idae; Pseudacteon bifidus; Pseudacteon catarinae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudact
eon hippeus; Pseudacteon nocens; Pseudacteon obtusus; diet preferences; biologic
al control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The tropical fire ant, Solenopsis geminata (F.)
 (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), is an invasive pest throughout most of the tropics, 
especially on islands in the Pacific. Natural enemies such as the fire ant decap
itating fly, Pseudacteon bifidus Brown and Morrison (Diptera: Phoridae), offer t
he potential for use as self-sustaining biological control agents provided they 
are host specific and do not cause other unintended problems. This paper provide
s details of sequential field and laboratory choice tests with host and non-host
 ants, as well as tests with a variety of potential food items to which adult fl
ies may be attracted. Results of these tests showed that P. bifidus flies are hi
ghly host specific to tropical fire ants and that they are not attracted to ants
 in other genera. Even other species of fire ants are unlikely to be parasitized
 by this fly in the field. Furthermore, tests with a variety of food items demon
strated that P. bifidus is not likely to be a nuisance to humans because it is n
ot attracted to carrion, feces, fruits, or various kinds of human food items. In
 short, P. bifidus would not likely cause unintended problems if it were used as
 a self-sustaining biological control agent of invasive tropical fire ants.   (T
his article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official 
time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Solenopsis aurea collec
ted in California.  Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier, P. nocens Borgmeier, P. obtu
sus Borgmeier attacking S. invicta colonies in Texas.  Nylanderia fulva incorrec
tly listed as a Dolichoderinae; it is a Formicinae.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.101.0111  
 or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/104398/101805   or pdf availa
ble through  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/104398   or html  http
://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.101.0111 \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplemental information available through  http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/
entomologist/browse \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23040\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Savignano, D.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Invasion of polygyne fire ants decimates native an
ts and disrupts arthropod community\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  71(6)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  2095-2106\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Invasion of polygyne fire ants decimates nat
ive ants and disrupts arthropod community\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1938623\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster texana; Atta tex
ana; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus americanus; Camponotus texanus; Conomyrma 
pyramicus flava; Crematogaster laeviuscula; Crematogaster punctulata; Cyphomyrme
x rimosus; Forelius foetida; Formica pallidefulva; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypopon
era opacior; Leptogenys elongata; Monomorium minimum; Myrmecina americana; Neiva
myrmex texanus; Pachycondyla harpax; Paratrechina terricola; Pheidole bicarinata
; Pheidole casta; Pheidole constipata; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole hyatti; Pheido
le lamia; Pheidole metallescens; Pogonomyrmex barbatus; Solenopsis geminata; Sol
enopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Strumigenys silvestrii; Trachymyrme
x turrifex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerina
e; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; population; interspecific int
eractions; community; nests; behavior; ant abundance; biodiversity; competition;
 diversity; exotic species; foraging intensity; invasion; polygyny; species rich
ness; bait; pitfall; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ant, S. invicta Buren, invaded southea
stern United States from South America more than 50 years ago.  Urban and agricu
ltural consequences of this invasion are well documented; however, ecological ef
fects are still poorly understood.  Increasing frequencies of 'polygyne' or mult
iple-queen fire ants in Texas and other areas of the Southeast are disturbing be
cause nest densities of this new form are often ten times greater than those of 
the more familiar monogyne form.  We studied the ecological impacts of a polygyn
e fire ant invasion on ants and other surface-active arthropods at a field stati
on in central Texas.  Arthropod abundance and species richness were assessed usi
ng a combination of baits, pitfall traps, and litter samples.  This invasion dec
imated the indigenous ant fauna.  Competitive replacement appears to be the prim
ary mechanism behind this effect.  Species richness of ants in infested areas dr
opped by 70%, while the total number of native individuals dropped by 90%.  Of 3
5 species of ants collected in this study, 23 were either significantly less com
mon or absent from infested sites; only S. invicta was more common at infested s
ites.  The most dramatic effect of the invasion was a 10-30 fold increase in the
 total number of ants at infested sites\u151?of which >99% were the imported fir
e ant S. invicta.  The impact of this invasion on other surface-active arthropod
s was less severe, but still substantial. The abundance of isopods, erythraeid m
ites, and tumblebug scarabs declined significantly, while the abundance of groun
d crickets, a brachypterous roach, and a symbiotic scarab increased significantl
y.  Overall, the species richness of non-ant arthropods was 30% lower in infeste
d sites and individual numbers were 75% lower.  Total arthropod species richness
 (including ants) was 40% less at infested sites.  These data indicate that poly
gyne fire ants pose a substantial threat to the biodiversity of native arthropod
 communities.    (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; Part of the L
eaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography; from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-SDP; v
erified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2377; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.6 MB  http://www.sbs.utexas.edu/bio373l/docs/ants/
porter.pdf   or 1.5 MB  https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.
2307/1938623   or 0.6 MB  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sanford_Porter/pu
blication/272570340_Invasion_of_Polygyne_Fire_Ants_Decimates_Native_Ants_and_Dis
rupts_Arthropod_Community/links/58459aef08aeda69681a5adb/Invasion-of-Polygyne-Fi
re-Ants-Decimates-Native-Ants-and-Disrupts-Arthropod-Community.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23022\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Population dynamics of harvester ant workers (Pogo
nomyrmex).  [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Breed, M.D., Michener, C.D. and Evans, H.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  The biology of social insects. Proceedings of
 the Ninth Congress of the IUSSI, Boulder, Colorado, August, 1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder, CO.  419 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  67\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Population dynamics of harvester ant workers
 (Pogonomyrmex).  [Abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Apr 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex; Myrmicinae; Nort
h America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; worker activity patterns; interior w
ork; exterior work; population; mortality rates; behavior; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23025\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): f
actors affecting worker size\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  78(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  381-386\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 May 1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism (Hymenoptera: Formicid
ae): factors affecting worker size\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/78.3.381\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; size; brood; growth; diet; worker siz
e; polymorphism; caste; homeostasis; caste regulation; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Worker size distributions are apparently not ho
meostatically regulated in colonies of the fire ant S. invicta Buren.  Pupae pro
duced in artificially composed polymorphic, dimorphic, and small-worker colonies
 were not significantly different in either average size or frequency distributi
ons.  However, larger colonies produced significantly larger pupae.  Average pup
al size was tightly correlated with the logarithm of colony size all the way fro
m single founding queens up to mature colonies with tens of thousands of workers
.  High larval density also resulted in significantly smaller pupae.  The appare
nt lack of homeostatic control combined with the influences of colony size and l
arval density, suggest that fire ant caste distributions do not track short-term
 environmental contingencies.  Nevertheless, the general relationship between wo
rker size and colony size is almost certainly adaptive.  (abstract provided by a
uthor)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 USDA-ARS, CMAVE M-2367, verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://bio.fsu.edu/~tschink/publications/1985-3.pdf 
  or pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/78/3/381/21422
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23026\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1985\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism: the ergonomics of brood pro
duction\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  16(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  323-336\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant polymorphism: the ergonomics of bro
od production\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/BF00295545\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, May 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; polymorphism; ecology; behavior; bioe
nergetics; colony growth; worker caste distribution; worker longevity; physiolog
y; respiration; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Social organization is generally assumed to inc
rease colony efficiency and survival; however, little quantitative information i
s available to support this assumption.  Polymorphism is an important aspect of 
labor division in colonies of the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. Our objective wa
s to investigate the effect of fire ant polymorphism on brood production efficie
ncy.  We set up standardized polymorphic colonies that contained only small, med
ium, or large workers respectively.  Polymorphic colonies produced brood at abou
t the same rate as colonies composed of only small workers.  Colonies composed o
f only medium workers produced about 30% less brood, and colonies composed of on
ly large workers produced little or no brood at all.  This pattern was independe
nt of colony size; however, smaller colonies (0.75 g, live weight) produced almo
st twice as much brood per gram of workers as larger colonies (3.0 g.).  Additio
nal experiments revealed that the size of workers in the artificial monomorphic 
colonies affected all stages of brood rearing.  Large workers not only inhibited
 the development of early and late instar larvae, but also reduced the queen's o
viposition rate.  Brood production efficiency on an energetic basis was determin
ed by dividing the grams of brood produced per unit time by the energetic costs 
expended for the maintenance and production of each worker size class.  Worker m
aintenance costs were estimated from respiration, while production costs were de
termined from the coloric content of worker tissue divided by their average long
evity.  Worker respiration per milligram body weight decreased about 40% as body
 size increased.  Large workers lived about 50% longer than small workers and co
ntained 9% more energy per milligram of tissue.  Energetic efficiency in polymor
phic colonies was approximately 10% higher than in colonies composed of only sma
ll workers.  In other words, when food supplies are limiting, polymorphism may o
ffer a slight advantage in brood production.   (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   o
r 1.3 MB    http://bio.fsu.edu/~tschink/publications/1985-1.pdf   or 1.5 MB   ht
tp://www.springerlink.com/content/j74l2321784jk835/fulltext.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23028\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Adaptive value of nanitic workers in newly founded
 red imported fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  79(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  723-726\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Adaptive value of nanitic workers in newly f
ounded red imported fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/79.4.723\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; colony founding; nanitic worke
rs; evolution; ergonomics; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Nanitics are miniature workers reared by the fo
unding queens of many ant species.  Founding fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invic
ta Buren) with nanitic workers produced 17% more brood than experimentally modif
ied colonies containing equal weights of normal-sized minor workers.  As predict
ed, the number of workers in our founding colonies, not worker size, was the pri
ncipal factor influencing brood production.  These results provide the first emp
irical evidence substantiating the hypothesis that nanitic workers are indeed ad
aptive.  (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2353.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://bio.fsu.edu/~tschink/publications/1988-3.pdf 
  or pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/79/4/723/21526
7   or pdf available through  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233653076
_Adaptive_Value_of_Nanitic_Workers_in_Newly_Founded_Red_Imported_Fire_Ant_Coloni
es_Hymenoptera_Formicidae \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23031\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging in Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formi
cidae): effects of weather and season\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  16(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  802-808\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging in Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera:
 Formicidae): effects of weather and season\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/16.3.802\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; foraging; temperature; humidity; weat
her; season; foraging rate; activity; soil moisture; soil temperature; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Foraging activity of the red imported fire ant,
 S. invicta Buren, was monitored at bait traps for 1 year to determine how weath
er and season affected foraging.  Soil temperature at 2 cm was the best individu
al predictor of foraging rates at our study site (R2  = 59%); workers foraged fr
om 15 to 43\u176?C, with maximal rates between 22 and 36\u176?C.  Season explain
ed another 19% of sample variation in a multiple regression with soil temperatur
e; this was because foraging was unusually low in late fall.  Rain reduced forag
ing rates by ca. 40% and explained an additional 3% of the variation.  Workers d
id not exhibit a tendency to forage more at night because neither time of day no
r night/day were significantly correlated with foraging.  Average weight of indi
vidual foragers increased ca. 30% with increasing soil temperature and decreased
 15% with the advancing season.  Soil-temperature data were used to calculate pe
riods of foraging activity for an open pasture, a nearby shaded woodlot, and sev
en additional locations in the southeastern United States.  Activity  periods we
re distinctly shorter in shady habitats and higher latitudes.   Low temperatures
 limited activity much more frequently than high temperatures.  (abstract provid
ed by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2352.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://bio.fsu.edu/~tschink/publications/1987-4.pdf 
  or pdf available through https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233712788_Fo
raging_in_Solenopsis_invicta_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_Effects_of_Weather_and_Seaso
n   or pdf available through  https://academic.oup.com/ee/article/16/3/802/38363
4 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23049\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Tschinkel, W.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant thermal preferences: behavioral control o
f growth and metabolism\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  32(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  321-329\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  May 1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant thermal preferences: behavioral con
trol of growth and metabolism\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/BF00183787\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Jan 06\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; bioenergetics; thermoregulation; ther
mal regulation; temperature preference; food limitation; thermal optima; hunger;
 behavior; brood tending; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Thermal preferences of well-fed and food-limite
d fire ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) were studied in relation to colony grow
th and metabolic costs.  The growth curve for well-fed colonies was strongly ske
wed toward warmer temperatures with maximal growth occurring near 32\u176?C (Fig
. 2A).  The growth curve for food-limited colonies was skewed toward cooler temp
eratures with maximal colony size occurring around 25\u176?C (Fig. 2B).  Food-li
mited colonies apparently grew larger at cooler temperatures because metabolic c
osts of workers were reduced.  A series of binary choice tests confirmed three p
redictions concerning fire ant thermal preferences (Fig. 3-4): First, well-fed c
olonies preferred brood temperatures very near the optimum for colony growth (31
\u176?C versus 32\u176?C).  Colonies were also able to select appropriate subopt
imal growth temperatures when the optimal range was unavailable.  Secondly, as p
redicted, a large percentage of colony workers (\u8776?30% in well-fed colonies)
 consistently chose cooler temperatures than those selected for the brood.  This
 strategy probably increases longevity of workers not directly associated with b
rood care.  Thirdly, food-limited colonies preferred cooler temperatures than we
ll-fed colonies.  Metabolic costs of food-limited colonies were reduced by appro
ximately 7% because of (1) slightly cooler brood temperatures (30\u176?C versus 
31\u176?C) and because (2) an additional 20-30% of the workers selected cooler t
emperatures.  The addition of excess food reversed food-limited thermal preferen
ces within 12 h for the brood (Fig. 5) and several days for the workers.  Contra
ry to expectations, thermal preferences for brood in food-limited colonies did n
ot match the food-limited growth curve, perhaps because fire ant colonies can ch
oose to rear brood at warm temperatures while maintaining accumulated colony bio
mass at cooler temperatures.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Go
vernment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2756.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifah
i-publications   }{\f1\fs28 or 1.6 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place
/66151015/publications/Porter_and_Tschinkel-1993(M-2756).pdf   or 1.1 MB http://
bio.fsu.edu/~tschink/publications/1993-5.pdf   or 1.3 MB http://www.springerlink
.com/content/hx85n1v1731m4111/fulltext.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 33917\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M., Davis, T.S., Briano, 
J.A., Calcaterra, L.A., Oi, D.H. and Jenkins, A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host range of the microsporidian pathogen Vairimor
pha invictae at three field sites in Argentina.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 205, In: R. Weeks, et al. [compiliers], P
roceedings of Annual Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 22-24, 2005, Gulfpo
rt, MS, 254 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host range of the microsporidian pathogen Va
irimorpha invictae at three field sites in Argentina.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 06; IN: PDF-10: a-2005_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Argentina; scientific; PCR screening procedure; host range; mic
rosporidia; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invicta
e is being evaluated for possible release in the United States as a potential cl
assical or self-sustaining biological control agent for imported fire ants. We e
xamined the host range of this pathogen in northern Argentina by collecting ants
 and other arthropods from three sites where Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonie
s had high levels of infection (28-83%). We examined 235 nonant arthropods from 
10 orders, 43 families, and more than 80 species with a PCR screening procedure;
 none were infected with V. invictae. We also examined 509 non-Solenopsis ants f
rom 12 genera, 19 species, and 61 baits using the same PCR screening procedure; 
again, none were infected with V. invictae. These data indicate that, in its nat
ive South American range, V. invictae is specific to Solenopsis fire ants.   (Th
is article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official t
ime, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-4060.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or in this 11.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/f/fe/2005_I
FA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38515\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M., Davis, T.S., Briano, 
J.A., Calcaterra, L.A., Oi, D.H. and Jenkins, R.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of the microsporidian pathogen Va
irimorpha invictae at five field sites with infected Solenopsis invicta fire ant
 colonies in northern Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  90(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  447-452\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of the microsporidian patho
gen Vairimorpha invictae at five field sites with infected Solenopsis invicta fi
re ant colonies in northern Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://dx.doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(20
07)90[447:HSOTMP]2.0.CO;2}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex; Brachymyrmex; Camp
onotus; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Ectatomma; Linepithema; Paratrechina; Pheidol
e; Solenopsis invicta; Wasmannia; Zacryptocerus; Dolichoderinae; Ectatomminae; F
ormicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; South America; Argentina; scientific; 
colonies; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Vairimorpha invictae; entomop
athogenic protozoa; host range; host specificity; disease prevalence; microspori
diosis; biocontrol agents; methods; polymerase chain reaction-based screening pr
ocedure; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The microsporidian pathogen Vairimorpha invicta
e is being evaluated for release in the United States as a potential self-sustai
ning biological control agent for imported fire ants. We examined the host range
 of this pathogen at 5 sites in northern Argentina where Solenopsis invicta Bure
n fire ant colonies had high levels of infection (28-83%). At 3 sites near the c
ity of Corrientes, we examined 509 non-Solenopsis ants from 61 collections, 12 g
enera, and 19 species with a polymerase chain reaction-based screening procedure
. No V. invictae infections were detected in any of the samples. At 2 sites near
 San Javier in Santa Fe Province, 350 km to the south, we screened another 438 n
on-Solenopsis ants from 44 baits, 4 genera, and 4 species, again with no infecti
ons. At the Corrientes sites, we also examined 235 non-ant arthropods from 10 or
ders, 43 families, and more than 80 species. None were infected with V. invictae
. The results of this study indicate that, in its native South American range, V
. invictae is specific to Solenopsis fire ants.   (This article was written and 
prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in th
e public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; Part of th
e Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography; from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://bioone.org/journals/florida-entomologist/vol
ume-90/issue-3/0015-4040_2007_90_447_HSOTMP_2.0.CO_2/HOST-SPECIFICITY-OF-THE-MIC
ROSPORIDIAN-PATHOGEN-VAIRIMORPHA-INVICTAE-AT-FIVE/10.1653/0015-4040(2007)90[447:
HSOTMP]2.0.CO;2.full   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/0015-4040%2820
07%2990%5B447%3AHSOTMP%5D2.0.CO%3B2   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/
Place/66151015/publications/Porter_et_al-2007(M-4242).pdf   or pdf available thr
ough http://hdl.handle.net/10113/6119 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62811\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M. and Gavilanez-Slone, J
.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Long-term efficacy of two cricket and two liver di
ets for rearing laboratory fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsi
s invicta)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  98(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  991-993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Long-term efficacy of two cricket and two li
ver diets for rearing laboratory fire ant colonies (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Sol
enopsis invicta)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653%2F024.098.0334  or   http:
//www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-46, May 16\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; diet; laboratory diet; labo
ratory rearing; liver; raw chicken meat; sugars; beef; Gryllidae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant colonies thrived on diets of sugar wat
er and either raw beef liver or raw chicken liver for almost 8 mo, after which b
rood production ceased in half of these colonies. As expected, colonies did well
 on a diet of sugar water and domestic crickets. Unexpectedly, however, banded c
rickets were much less suitable than either liver or domestic crickets.   (This 
article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time
, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.098.0334  
 or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/10.1653/024.098.0334 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 59706\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M. and Oi, D.H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity and colony impacts of the fire an
t pathogen, Solenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Invertebr. Pathol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  114(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1-6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 2013; online 9 May 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity and colony impacts of the f
ire ant pathogen, Solenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Invertebrate Pathology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2013.04.013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae
; North America; scientific; pathogens; biopesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 
3; SINV-3; positive-strand RNA virus; Picornavirales; Red imported fire ant; bio
control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  An understanding of host specificity is essenti
al before pathogens can be used as biopesticides or self-sustaining biocontrol a
gents. In order to define the host range of the recently discovered Solenopsis i
nvicta virus 3 (SINV-3), we exposed laboratory colonies of 19 species of ants in
 14 genera and 4 subfamilies to this virus. Despite extreme exposure during thes
e tests, active, replicating infections only occurred in Solenopsis invicta Bure
n and hybrid (S. invicta x S. richteri) fire ant colonies. The lack of infection
s in test Solenopsis geminata fire ants from the United States indicates that SI
NV-3 is restricted to the saevissima complex of South American fire ants, especi
ally since replicating virus was also found in several field-collected samples o
f the black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri Forel. S. invicta colonies in
fected with SINV-3 declined dramatically with average brood reductions of 85% or
 more while colonies of other species exposed to virus remained uninfected and h
ealthy. The combination of high virulence and high host specificity suggest that
 SINV-3 has the potential for use as either a biopesticide or a self-sustaining 
biocontrol agent.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government em
ployee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 15; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 64771\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M. and Pereira, R.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2016\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Scavenging crickets (Orthoptera: Gryllidae) transm
it Solenopsis invicta virus 3 to red imported fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
 colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  99(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  811-812\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  December 2016\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Scavenging crickets (Orthoptera: Gryllidae) 
transmit Solenopsis invicta virus 3 to red imported fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formi
cidae) colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.099.0444   or   http:/
/www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-52, Jan 17\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Sol
enopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; inter-colony transmission; host-specificity tes
ts; biocontrol; house cricket; Acheta domesticus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This study demonstrated that Solenopsis invicta
 virus 3 (SINV-3) can be mechanically transmitted among colonies of fire ants (H
ymenoptera: Formicidae) by scavengers like the house cricket (Orthoptera: Grylli
dae), which readily eat dead infected fire ant workers without becoming infected
 themselves.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employe
e(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 17; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/88139/8
6132   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.099.0444   or pdf availabl
e through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/88139   or html http://ww
w.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.099.0444 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62595\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Valles, S.M., Wild, A.L., Dieckmann
, R. and Plowes, N.J.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: Further host-specifici
ty tests with native Solenopsis ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  98(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  122-125\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: Further host-spe
cificity tests with native Solenopsis ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.098.0120\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-46, Apr 16\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis aurea; Solenopsis c
arolinensis; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis molesta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicin
ae; North America; USA; Arizona; California; Florida; Illinois; scientific; symb
iont; myrmecophile; pathogen; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; host-specifici
ty tests; biocontrol; host range; thief ant; native fire ant; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A thorough understanding of host specificity is
 essential before pathogens can be used as biopesticides or self-sustaining bioc
ontrol agents. In order to better define the host range of Solenopsis invicta vi
rus 3 (SINV-3), we collected and exposed colonies of 2 native fire ants (Solenop
sis aurea Wheeler, Solenopsis xyloni McCook) and 2 native thief ants (Solenopsis
 carolinensis Forel, Solenopsis molesta [Say]) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) to the 
SINV-3 virus. Despite extreme exposure to the virus, active, replicating infecti
ons resulted only in colonies of the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta B
uren). These results, combined with a previous study of ants from 13 other gener
a, strongly support the proposition that the SINV-3 virus can be used safely as 
either a biopesticide or a self-sustaining biocontrol agent in parts of Californ
ia, the Caribbean, and other regions of the world where this virus does yet not 
occur.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) o
n official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.098.0120  
 or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/84352/81463   or   https://ww
w.researchgate.net/profile/Nicola_Plowes/publication/275521297_Solenopsis_invict
a_virus_3_Further_Host-Specificity_Tests_with_Native_Solenopsis_Ants_%28Hymenopt
era_Formicidae%29/links/553e63570cf210c0bdaa6d4a.pdf   or html http://www.bioone
.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.098.0120 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23036\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Van Eimeren, B. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Invasion of red imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: F
ormicidae): microgeography of competitive replacement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  81(6)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  913-918\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  November 1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Invasion of red imported fire ants (Hymenopt
era: Formicidae): microgeography of competitive replacement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/81.6.913\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; colony f
ounding; ecology; distribution; interspecific interactions; competition; aggress
ion; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The invasion of Brackenridge Field Laboratory, 
Austin, Texas by the multiple-queen form of the red imported fire ant, S. invict
a Buren, was monitored for 3 yr.  This invasion provides a rare glimpse of compe
titive replacement in progress.  It has been remarkable for two reasons.  First,
 imported fire ant colonies replaced colonies of the native fire ant, S. geminat
a (F.). at a rate of 6:1, including a radical restructuring of the arthropod com
munity rather than a simple one-for-one substitution of an equivalent species.  
Secondly, the invasion proceeded at a very slow rate (about 35m/yr) along a cont
inous front in a pattern best explained by colony budding and considerable bioti
c resistance from the native ant community.  These data indicate that the invasi
on process may continue at the local level for years or even decades after the p
assage of the main invasion front.  (abstract provided by author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2349.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.6 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/Porter_et_al-1988(M-2349).pdf   or 1 MB pdf available throu
gh  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/81/6/913/9372 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23055\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Vander Meer, R.K., Pesquero, M.A., 
Campiolo, S. and Fowler, H.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) fire ant reac
tions to attacks of Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) in Southeastern Brazil
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  88(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  570-575\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 1995\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) fire an
t reactions to attacks of Pseudacteon flies (Diptera: Phoridae) in Southeastern 
Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aesa/88.4.570\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Camponotus; Ectatomma; Solenop
sis invicta; Solenopsis saevissima; Ectatomminae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; South 
America; Brazil; scientific; biology; oviposition; colony; behavior; foraging; a
ggression; defensive; defense responses; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Dipte
ra; Phoridae; Pseudacteon litoralis; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon pradei; Ps
eudacteon nr. tricuspis; Pseudacteon wasmanni; biocontrol; defense responses; pa
rasitic flies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We studied the responses of Solenopsis fire ant
s to Pseudacteon phorid fly attacks in southeastern Brazil.  The presence of the
se phorid parasites triggered a suite of phorid-specific defense responses inclu
ding reduced foraging, bait guarding, a curled defensive posture, and general co
lony immobility.  The existence of these phorid-specific defenses indicates that
 Pseudacteon phorids exert substantial evolutionary pressure on South American f
ire ant populations.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government
 employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-2938.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_et_al-1995(M-2938).pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/nald
c/download.xhtml?id=23165&content=PDF   or pdf available through https://www.res
earchgate.net/publication/43274730_Solenopsis_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_Fire_Ant_Re
actions_to_Attacks_of_Pseudacteon_Flies_Diptera_Phoridae_in_Southeastern_Brazil 
  or pdf available through https://academic.oup.com/aesa/article/88/4/570/17009 
\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47277\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Williams, D.F. and Patterson, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Factors affecting the relative densities of fire a
nts in North and South America.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 68, In: J.P. Ellis [compiler], Proceeding
s of the 1993 Imported Fire Ant Conference, June 15-18, 1993, Charleston, South 
Carolina, 141 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Factors affecting the relative densities of 
fire ants in North and South America.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, May 10; IN: a-1993_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; South America; Brazil; scientific; populations; relative d
ensities; baits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3.6 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/7/74/1993_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23057\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Williams, D.F. and Patterson, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing the decapitating fly Pseudacteon tricuspis
 (Diptera: Phoridae) in imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solenopsis)
 from the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  90(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  135-138\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  01 February 1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Rearing the decapitating fly Pseudacteon tri
cuspis (Diptera: Phoridae) in imported fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Solen
opsis) from the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/90.1.135\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid; Myrmicinae; North America; USA;
 Florida; Mississippi; South America; Argentina; scientific; life cycle; behavio
r; host parasite relationships; decapitation; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; 
Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; importation; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The South American phorid fly Pseudacteon tricu
spis Borgmeier was imported into quarantine facilities in Gainesville, FL, to st
udy its life history and determine if it could be reared on imported fire ant wo
rkers from North America.  We found that this fly developed successfully on Sole
nopsis invicta Buren workers from Florida and hybrid Solenopsis richteri  Forel 
X S. invicta fire ants from Mississippi.  It also was reared on S. richteri and 
S. invicta  fire ants from Argentina.  This fly, like its congener Pseudacteon l
itoralis Borgmeier, had the peculiar habit of decapitating its living host and u
sing the ant's empty head capsule as its pupal case.  We were able to rear this 
fly through 1 complete generation in the laboratory, indicating that mass rearin
g for inoculative releases in the United States may be possible.   (This article
 was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and i
s therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3102.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Porter_et_al-1997(M-3102).pdf   or pdf available through  https://a
cademic.oup.com/jee/article/90/1/135/2216659 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 23056\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D., Williams, D.F., Patterson, R.S. and
 Fowler, H.G.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Intercontinental differences in the abundance of S
olenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): an escape from natural enemies?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  26(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  373-384\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Intercontinental differences in the abundanc
e of Solenopsis fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): an escape from natural enem
ies?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ee/26.2.373\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Solenopsis geminat
a; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis macdonaghi; Solenopsis pythia; Solenopsis quin
quecuspis; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; Puerto Rico; USA; Ala
bama; Florida; Georgia; Texas; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Paraguay; scien
tific; polygyny; season; temperature; climate; climatic factors; precipitation; 
distribution; occurrence; population; mound size; mound density; habitat; invasi
on; biocontrol; bait; sampling; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The absence of natural enemies often allows exo
tic pests to reach densities that are much higher than normally occur in their n
ative habitats.  When Solenopsis fire ants were introduced into the United State
s, their numerous natural enemies were left behind in South America.  To compare
 intercontinental fire ant densities, we selected 13 areas in South America and 
another 12 areas in North America.  Sample areas were paired with weather statio
ns and distributed across a broad range of climatic conditions.  In each area, w
e measured fire ant densities at 5 preselected roadside sites that were at least
 5 km apart.  At each site, we also measured foraging activity, checked for poly
gyne colonies, and recorded various kinds of environmental data.  In most areas,
 we also measured fire ant densities in lawns and grazing land.  Fire ant popula
tions along roadsides in North America were 4-7 times higher than fire ant popul
ations in South America.  Similar intercontinental differences were found in law
ns and on grazing lands.  These intercontinental differences in fire ant abundan
ce were not associated with sampling conditions, seasonal variability, habitat d
ifferences, or the frequency of polygyny.  Although several correlations were fo
und with long-term weather conditions, careful inspection of the data suggests t
hat these correlations were probably more coincidental than causal.  Cultural di
fferences in roadside maintenance may explain some of the intercontinental diffe
rences in fire ant abundance, but they did not account for equivalent interconti
nental differences in grazing land and mowed lawns.  Bait tests showed that comp
etition with other ants was much more important in South America; however, we we
re not able to determine whether this was a major cause of intercontinental diff
erences or largely a consequence of other factors such as the numerous pathogens
 and parasites that are found in South America.  Because this study was correlat
ional, we were unable to determine the cause(s) of the large intercontinental di
fference in fire ant abundance that we observed.  However, we were able to large
ly exclude a number of possible explanations for the differences, including samp
ling, season, polygyny, climate, and aspects of habitat.  By a process of  elimi
nation, escape from natural enemies remains among the most likely explanations f
or the unusually high densities of fire ants found in North America.   (This art
icle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, a
nd is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 97; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.2 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Porter_et_al-1997(M-3132).pdf   or 0.5 MB http://www.ars.usd
a.gov/sites/fireants/publications/EE26_373.pdf   or 5.5 MB http://ee.oxfordjourn
als.org/content/ee/26/2/373.full.pdf   or pdf available through http://www.ars.u
sda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter   or 5.5 MB pdf available through https://acade
mic.oup.com/ee/article/26/2/373/2464512 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32954\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The FORMIS ant Bibliography:  A window on the worl
d's ant literature and a door into myrmecology's future.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Billen, J.P.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  The golden jubilee proceedings.  Proceedings 
of the XIV International Congress of IUSSI, 27 July - 3 August 2002, Hokkaido Un
iversity, Sapporo\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.  23
3 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Hokkaido University Coop.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  88\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The FORMIS ant Bibliography:  A window on th
e world's ant literature and a door into myrmecology's future.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Nov 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; scientific; bibliography; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3954.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or     http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Porte
r_and_Wojcik-2002(M-3954).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 58416\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Resasco, J., Porter, S.D., Sanders, N.J. and Leve
y, D.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2014\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Assessing the effects of sodium on fire ant foragi
ng in the field and colony growth in the laboratory\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecol. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  39(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  267-271\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2014; published online 26 Dec. 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Assessing the effects of sodium on fire ant 
foraging in the field and colony growth in the laboratory\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ecological Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/een.12089\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-42, July 15\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; colony growth; physiology; 
NaCl; salt limitation; anthropogenic activities; baits; environmental impact; fo
raging; population growth; sodium; sodium chloride; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Sodium is an essential dietary element and pref
erential foraging for high concentrations of sodium by inland herbivorous and om
nivorous ants suggests it may be limiting. If so, increased sodium availability 
through altered deposition and anthropogenic sources may lead to increased colon
y and population growth and cascading ecological impacts.  For red imported fire
 ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren, the present study tests: (i) whether colonies f
rom coastal and inland sites differ in their responses to NaCl baits; and (ii) w
hether supplemental NaCl increases growth of fire ant colonies in the laboratory
.  Fire ants in inland sites with low sodium deposition responded roughly an ord
er of magnitude more strongly to high concentrations of NaCl baits than did fire
 ants in coastal sites with high sodium deposition.  Laboratory colonies of fire
 ants, however, showed no signs of sodium limitation or benefits of increased so
dium. The link between behavioral responses to baits in the field and effects on
 colony growth deserves further investigation to assess the ecological impacts o
f altered sodium availability.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. 
Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://macroecointern.dk/pdf-reprints/Resasco_EE_201
4.pdf   or   https://julianresasco.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/een12089.pdf   or
   http://www.natesanders.org/uploads/4/8/0/8/48085029/2014-resasco-een.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supporting Information available through http://onlinelibrary.wiley.co
m/doi/10.1111/een.12089/suppinfo \par }
{\f1\fs28 Figure S1. Photograph of one experimental fire ant colony.  JPEG image
, 47K.\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 67684\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Schreiber, L.A., Hansen, C.P., Rumble, M.A., Mill
spaugh, J.J., Gamo, R.S., Kehmeier, J.W. and Wojcik, N.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Microhabitat selection of brood-rearing sites by G
reater Sage-Grouse in Carbon County, Wyoming\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  West. N. Am. Natur.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  75(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  348-363\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Microhabitat selection of brood-rearing site
s by Greater Sage-Grouse in Carbon County, Wyoming\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Western North American Naturalist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.3398/064.075.0312\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-60, Jan 18\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pogonomyrmex; Myrmicinae; Nort
h America; USA; Wyoming; scientific; predator; myrmecophagy; bird; Greater Sage-
Grouse; Centrocercus urophasianus; brood rearing; canopy; carbon; chicks; female
s; food availability; forbs; global positioning systems; logit analysis; microha
bitats; plant communities; probability; vegetation types; wind power; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Declines in Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus u
rophasianus, hereafter sage-grouse) populations could be attributed to low chick
 survival, which may be influenced by the availability of food and cover at site
s used by females rearing broods. Habitat attributes important to broods may var
y regionally; thus, it is necessary to understand factors affecting regional sag
e-grouse brood-rearing site selection, especially when estimating the impacts of
 development. We monitored brood-rearing female sage-grouse equipped with solar 
Argos Global Positioning System Platform Transmitter Terminals from 2011 to 2013
 to assess microhabitat selection by broods in Carbon County, Wyoming. We measur
ed vegetation and arthropod characteristics at diurnal sites used by broods (n =
 42 in 2011, n = 31 in 2012, n = 32 in 2013) and at 3 paired-random sites associ
ated with each used site (n = 315), located 50 m, 250 m, and 500 m from the used
 site. We fit conditional logistic models within an information-theoretic framew
ork to identify vegetation and arthropod characteristics associated with microsi
te selection of brood-rearing sites. Sage-grouse selected brood-rearing sites wi
th greater visual obstruction (0-45.7 cm in height), higher numbers of arthropod
s in the order Diptera, and lower numbers of arthropods in the order Coleoptera.
 There was an interaction effect between the number of arthropods in the order H
ymenoptera and the canopy cover of broad-leaf forbs; the relative probability of
 selection increased with increasing number of Hymenoptera when there was low co
ver (<20%) of broad-leaf forbs, but decreased with increasing number of Hymenopt
era when there was high broad-leaf forb cover (>20%). We also found a quadratic 
relationship between selection of brood-rearing sites and total vegetation canop
y cover; the relative probability of selection increased until approximately 75%
 cover and then decreased with increasing cover. Sage-grouse rearing broods sele
cted a diverse array of vegetation types, but greatest use occurred within mesic
 communities. Our results could be used to identify vegetation communities with 
high relative probabilities of use by sage-grouse rearing broods, which will hel
p guide management decisions and provide reference conditions for future researc
h that evaluates the effects of wind energy development on sage-grouse.   (This 
article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time
, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[Pogonomyrmex spp. harvester
 ants, one the most common species of Hymenoptera on our study area, are associa
ted with sandy soils in arid environments. ]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 18; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW, 
verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_journals/2015/rmrs_201
5_schreiber_l001.pdf   or pdf available through  https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesea
rch/pubs/50108   or pdf available through  https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/wnan/
vol75/iss3/11 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 25944\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Shattuck, S.O., Porter, S.D. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 (Insecta, Hymenopte
ra): proposed conservation of the specific name\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bull. Zool. Nomencl.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  56(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  27-30\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 (Insecta, Hym
enoptera): proposed conservation of the specific name\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 saevissima wagneri; Solenopsis wagneri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South A
merica; scientific; nomenclature; taxonomy; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The purpose of this application is to conserve 
the specific name of the ant Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 (Formicidae).  This 
ant is a well-known imported pest in the southeastern United States and Puerto R
ico.  The name is threatened by the poorly understood and little used senior sub
jective synonym S. wagneri Santschi, 1916.   This article was written and prepar
ed by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the publ
ic domain.          *[S. wagneri has been supressed in favor of S. invicta, Anon
. 2001.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; from SDP, verified-SDP, USDA-CMAVE M-3354.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or 0.3 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Sh
attuck_et_al-1999(M-3354).pdf   or 1.7 MB http://www.antwiki.org/wiki/images/a/a
c/Porter_S_Shattuck_S_Wojcik_D_1999_%28not_2004%29.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62594\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Shi, Q.H., Hu, L., Wang, W.K., Vander Meer, R.K.,
 Porter, S.D. and Chen, L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Workers and alate queens of Solenopsis geminata sh
are qualitatively similar but quantitatively different venom alkaloid chemistry\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Front. Ecol. Evol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  3: 76\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  9 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  22 July 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Workers and alate queens of Solenopsis gemin
ata share qualitatively similar but quantitatively different venom alkaloid chem
istry\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.3389/fevo.2015.00076\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-46, Apr 16\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Myrmicina
e; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; alate queens; chemistry; ve
nom; alkaloids; piperidine; GC-MS; isomer; cis-2-methyl-6-n-undecylpiperidines; 
trans-2-methyl-6-n-undecylpiperidines; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis geminata group (Hymenoptera: Formici
dae) encompasses ant species commonly called fire ants because of their painful 
sting. The many physiological effects of the venom are caused by 2-methyl-6-alky
l and/or alkenylpiperidine alkaloids. The variation in piperidine alkaloid struc
tures has useful taxonomic characters. The most well studied Solenopsis species 
is Solenopsis invicta, which was accidentally imported into the USA in the 1930s
 from South America. It quickly spread throughout the southern USA and is now a 
major invasive pest ant in the USA and in other parts of the world.  Interesting
ly, the invasive S. invicta has largely displaced a native USA fire ant, S. gemi
nata, from the southern USA. We explore the possibility that differences in veno
m chemistry could be correlated with this displacement. The cis and trans alkalo
ids from body extracts of workers and alate queens of S. geminata were separated
 by silica gel chromatography, identified, and quantitated by GC-MS analysis. Bo
th workers and alate queens produce primarily cis- and trans-2-methyl-6-n-undecy
lpiperidines, as well as other minor alkaloid components. Imported fire ant, S. 
invicta, alate queens produce the same alkaloids as S. geminata alate queens, bu
t in contrast S. invicta workers produce piperidine alkaloids with longer side c
hains, which are purported to be physiologically more effective. These results a
re discussed in relation to the evolutionary progression of fire ant venom alkal
oids and displacement of S. geminata by S. invicta in the USA.   (This article w
as written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is 
therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through https://www.researchgate.net/p
ublication/280308296_Workers_and_alate_queens_of_Solenopsis_geminata_share_quali
tatively_similar_but_quantitatively_different_venom_alkaloid_chemistry   or pdf 
available through html http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fevo.2015.
00076/full   or   https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/82847252.pdf   or   https://pd
fs.semanticscholar.org/749f/759f4c2a42260b5df40adda1e8864eeee569.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 73047\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Souza, D.R. de, Munhae, C. de B., Kamura, C.M., P
ortero, N. da S. and Morini, M.S. de C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2012\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Formigas em \u225?reas urbanizadas da Serra do Ita
peti\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Morini, M.S. de C. and Miranda, V.F.O.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Serra do Itapeti: aspectos hist\u243?ricos, s
ociais e natural\u237?sticos\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Bauru\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Editora Canal6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  301-310\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Formigas em \u225?reas urbanizadas da Serra 
do Itapeti\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, May 20\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-76, May 20; (entire book) in this 15. 2 MB pdf
 file: 2012 Serra do Itapeti-aspectos historicos, sociais e nat\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Acromyrmex crassispinus; Acrom
yrmex disciger; Acromyrmex niger; Anochetus altisquamis; Apterostigma; Atta sexd
ens; Brachymyrmex heeri; Brachymyrmex incisus; Brachymyrmex luederwaldti; Brachy
myrmex pictus; Camponotus atriceps; Camponotus crassus; Camponotus (Myrmaphaenus
) novogranadensis; Camponotus rufipes; Camponotus; Camponotus (Myrmaphaenus); Ca
mponotus (Tanaemyrmex); Cephalotes; Crematogaster (Orthocrema); Crematogaster; D
orymyrmex; Ectatomma brunneum; Ectatomma edendatum; Gnamptogenys striatula; Gnam
ptogenys; Hypoponera; Labidus praedator; Leptothorax; Linepithema iniquum; Linep
ithema neotropicum; Megalomyrmex; Monomorium pharaonis; Mycetarotes parallelus; 
Mycetosoritis; Myrmelachista bettinae; Myrmelachista ruszkii; Nylanderia fulva; 
Odontomachus affinis; Odontomachus chelifer; Odontomachus meinerti; Oxyepoecus; 
Pachycondyla striata; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Procrypt
ocerus pr. schmalzi; Pseudomyrmex gracilis; Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Pseudomyrmex 
phyllophylus; Solenopsis saevissima; Solenopsis; Strumigenys schmalzi; Tapinoma 
melanocephalum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis) gp.; Typhlomyrmex rogennoferi; Was
mannia auropunctata; Wasmannia; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Ectatomminae; Formic
inae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; South America; Brazil; scientific
; distribution; diversity; impact; urban; houses; pitfall traps; hand collecting
; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Camponotus (Tanaemyrmex) misspelled Camponotu
s (Taemyrmex); Labidus praedator misspelled Labidus praedador; Oxyepoecus misspe
lled Oxypoecus; Strumigenys schmalzi misspelled Strumygenys schmalzi; Trachymyrm
ex septentrionalis) gp. misspelled Trachymyrmex septentrionales) gp.; Typhlomyrm
ex rogennoferi misspelled Thypholomyrmex rogennoferi.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bi
bliography; from Fire Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB pdf available through  https://www.researchga
te.net/publication/324138100_Formigas_em_areas_urbanizadas_na_Serra_do_Itapeti  
 or (entire book) in this 15. 2 MB pdf file  http://www.creasp.org.br/biblioteca
/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/serradoitapeti.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 27983\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Tennant, L.E. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of diets of two fire ant species (Hymen
optera: Formicidae): solid and liquid components\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Entomol. Sci.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  26(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  450-465\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  01 October 1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of diets of two fire ant species 
(Hymenoptera: Formicidae): solid and liquid components\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Entomological Science\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.18474/0749-8004-26.4.450\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Oct 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; biology; diet; pol
ygyny; foraging success; tending Hemiptera; liquid food; solid food; carbohydrat
e; sugar; plant nectar; trophic level; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Diets of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta 
Buren, and the native fire ant, Solenopsis geminata [F.], were studied in adjace
nt field colonies in south central Texas.  A comparison of solid food diets of t
he two species revealed a 59% overlap of identifiable arthropods and other solid
 food matter.  The major difference was that S. geminata collected eight times m
ore seeds than did S. invicta.  Both species collected liquid food much more fre
quently than solid food; in fact, an average of 70-80% of successful foragers re
turned with liquid.  Rates of liquid collection were approximately 40% higher fo
r S. invicta than for S. geminata.  Foraging rates fluctuated with season but th
e percent of successful foragers returning with liquid remained relatively const
ant.  Plants and honeydew producing homopterans are the most probable sources of
 this liquid based on sugar and amino acid analyses of S. invicta foragers.  Use
 of liquid carbohydrate energy sources helps explain how fire ant colonies can c
ollect sufficient food to sustain extremely dense field populations.   (This art
icle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, a
nd is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-SDP; verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-2551.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.9 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Tennant_and_Porter-1991(M-2551).pdf   or 0.9 MB https://www.
ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publications/Tennant_and_Porter-1991(M-2551).
pdf   or 0.5 MB pdf available through  https://meridian.allenpress.com/jes/artic
le/26/4/450/75066/Comparison-of-Diets-of-Two-Fire-Ant-Species?searchresult=1 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 28219\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Thompson, L., Korzukhin, M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling fire ant range expansion\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 121-123, In: Shanklin, D. et al. (Comp.),
 Proceedings of the 1998 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 6-8, 1998,
 Hot Springs, Arkansas, 199 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling fire ant range expansion\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; range extension; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 11.5 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/3/38/1998_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 37358\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Thompson, L., Korzukhin, M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling potential RIFA range expansion in the Uni
ted States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 13-20, In: Proceedings of the 1999 Import
ed Fire Ant Conference, March 3-5, 1999, Charleston, South Carolina, 154 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling potential RIFA range expansion in t
he United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; expansion; invasive species; mod
el; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 8.3 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/3/32/1999_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48114\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Thompson, L.C., Korzukhin, M. and Porter, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Cold winter of 2000-01 drastically reduces red imp
orted fire ant populations in southern Arkansas: using a model to verify what wa
s perceived\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 125-130, In: D. Suiter, et al., [compilie
rs], Proceedings of the 2002 Imported Fire Ant Conference, 24-26 March 2002, Ath
ens, GA, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Cold winter of 2000-01 drastically reduces r
ed imported fire ant populations in southern Arkansas: using a model to verify w
hat was perceived\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, March 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Arkansas; scientific; temperature; season; winter kill; po
pulations; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The winter of 2000-2001 in Arkansas was especia
lly cold and wet.  During the subsequent spring of 2001, it was observed that re
d imported fire ant populations in the state had been reduced substantially from
 those of 2000.  Although the exact cause of the population reduction is unknown
, it is believed that the combination of cold and saturated soils was responsibl
e.  Theoretically, saturated soils keep fire ants above the water-line and close
 to the soil surface where they will be vulnerable to cold temperatures.  To eva
luate this thesis, we obtained max/min weather data for 54 Arkansas weather stat
ions for the years 2000 and 2001.   Weather is an important variable in our comp
uter model (Korzukhin et al. 2001) where cold induced mortality is one of the fa
ctors influencing population dynamics.  The analysis showed that our model was n
ot very good at predicting colony mortality, but it did predict worker ant morta
lity reasonably well.  Thus, our model probably needs to be adjusted to reflect 
the influence that high water tables might have on RIFA susceptibility to cold w
eather.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) 
on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 10.7 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/a/a6/2002_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32549\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Thompson, L.C., Porter, S.D. and Korzukhin, M.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The model analysis of the potential temperature-de
pendent range for the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta in the United Sta
tes.  [in Russian]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Prob. Ecol. Monit. Ecosyst. Model.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  27\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  275-286\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The model analysis of the potential temperat
ure-dependent range for the red imported fire ant Solenopsis invicta in the Unit
ed States.  [in Russian]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Problems of Ecological Monitoring and 
Ecosystem Modelling\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Apr 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; model analysis; potential temperature-dependen
t range; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48113\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Thompson, L.C., Wiley, S., Korzukhin, M. and Port
er, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Best timing for one application of amdro\u174? bai
t for red imported fire ant control in the southern U.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 120-124, In: D. Suiter, et al., [compilie
rs], Proceedings of the 2002 Imported Fire Ant Conference, 24-26 March 2002, Ath
ens, GA, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Best timing for one application of amdro\u174
? bait for red imported fire ant control in the southern U.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, March 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississipp
i; North Carolina; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; scientific; tempe
rature; season; chemical control; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Insecticide baits are very effective in reducin
g populations of the red imported fire ant.  Research using a computer model of 
red imported fire ant population dynamics (Korzukhin et al. 20011, showed that 2
 to 4 applications may be needed to maintain fire ant populations at very low le
vels, with 1 to 3 applications needed to keep ants at moderate levels (Wiley et 
al. 2000).  If the number of applications needed is partially answered, the next
 question to be asked is when is the best time to apply a bait to maximize long 
term control.  Because our model follows the growth of each colony and its inter
action with up to 500 neighboring colonies, conducting model runs to study this 
question is best done with a fast computer and lots of memory.  Unfortunately, t
ime and technology limitations only ailowed us to model scenarios for one applic
ation per year.  The results showed that either September or October is a good t
ime if one is making only one bait application of Amdro per year. In the deep So
uth, November would also be fine.  As we get more time, scenarios with 2,3, and 
4 applications wiIl be conducted.   (This article was written and prepared by U.
S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domai
n.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 10.7 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/a/a6/2002_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 28667\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Tschinkel, W.R. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Efficiency of sperm use in queens of the fire ant,
 Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  81(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  777-781\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Efficiency of sperm use in queens of the fir
e ant, Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/81.5.777\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; mating; colony size; growth; season; 
reproduction; spermatozoa; spermatheca; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Like most social Hymenoptera, queens of the fir
e ant, S. invicta Buren, mate only at the beginning of their reproductive lives.
  They receive an initial supply of about 7 million sperm which they gradually p
arcel out over a period of almost 7 yr until the supply is exhausted and they ca
n no longer produce female offspring.  Using the monogynous form of the fire ant
, efficiency of sperm use was determined directly by allowing four newly mated q
ueens to rear approximately 0.5 million workers.  The mean sperm count of these 
queens declined by 1.7 million from the starting value, yielding an efficiency o
f 3.2 sperm per adult female offspring.  Sperm-use efficiency was also determine
d indirectly for field queens based on calculations that show these queens expen
d 7.0 million sperm to produce 2.6 million workers for an efficiency of about 2.
6 sperm per adult female.  Lifetime worker production was calculated from annual
 estimates of colony growth and worker turnover.  These estimates of fire ant sp
erm-use efficiency are about 10 times higher than those reported for honey bee q
ueens and astronomically higher than those of most nonsocial animals.  Apparentl
y, efficient use of sperm is an important reproductive capability for S. invicta
 and other social insects with high reproductive outputs.  (abstract provided by
 author)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-SDP; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Tschinkel_and_Porter-1988(M-2351).pdf   or   http://bio.fsu.edu/~ts
chink/publications/1988-5.pdf   or pdf available through  https://academic.oup.c
om/aesa/article/81/5/777/96433 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 28886\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vail, K., Davis, L., Wojcik, D., Koehler, P. and 
Williams, D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Structure-invading ants of Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  University of Florida, Cooperative Extension
 Service, Gainesville, FL, SP 164, 15 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: Sept. 1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Structure-invading ants of Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus abdom
inalis floridanus; Camponotus castaneus; Camponotus decipiens; Camponotus nearct
icus; Camponotus pennsylvanicus; Camponotus planatus; Camponotus tortuganus; Con
omyrma bossuta; Conomyrma bureni; Conomyrma elegans; Conomyrma flavopecta; Conom
yrma grandula; Conomyrma reginicula; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex bossuta; Dorymyrm
ex bureni; Dorymyrmex elegans; Dorymyrmex flavopecta; Dorymyrmex grandula; Dorym
yrmex reginicula; Forelius pruinosus; Hypoponera opaciceps; Hypoponera punctatis
sima; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithema humile; Monomorium destructor; Monomorium
 floricola; Monomorium pharaonis; Monomorium trageri; Paratrechina bourbonica; P
aratrechina concinna; Paratrechina guatemalensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Para
trechina phantasma; Paratrechina pubens; Paratrechina wojciki; Pheidole dentata;
 Pheidole floridana; Pheidole megacephala; Pheidole moerens; Pogonomyrmex badius
; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex cubaensis; Pseudomyrmex ejectus; Pseudomyrmex
 mexicanus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum);
 Tapinoma melanocephalum; Technomyrmex albipes; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Tetramo
rium caldarium; Tetramorium simillimum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; 
Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida
; extension; biology; colony; mating; flight; morphology; taxonomy; key; ecology
; distribution; behavior; impact; medical; urban; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) bossuta, Dorymyrmex 
(= Conomyrma) bureni, pyramid, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) elegans, Dorymyrmex (= C
onomyrma) flavopecta, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma) grandula, Dorymyrmex (= Conomyrma
) reginicula, Linepithema humile (= Iridomyrmex humilis).]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2882; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  6 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/661
51015/publications/Vail_et_al-1994(M-2882).pdf   or 1.6 MB  http://antbase.org/a
nts/publications/13563/13563.pdf   or 1.6 MB http://bio1.elmira.edu/ent/nmnhtype
db/images/pdfs/13563.pdf   or pdf available through  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa
/cmave/ifahi-publications   or 1.7 MB pdf available through  https://www.antcat.
org/references/129461 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 44849\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Oi, D.H. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Kneallhazia (=Thelohania) solenopsae infection rat
e of Pseudacteon curvatus flies determined by multiplex PCR\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  92(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  344-349\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  June 2009\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Kneallhazia (=Thelohania) solenopsae infecti
on rate of Pseudacteon curvatus flies determined by multiplex PCR\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/024.092.0220\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-18, Sept 09\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; par
asitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biological control; parasite; 
entomopathogen; microsporidia; Microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Thelohania
 solenopsae; multiplex PCR; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A multiplex PCR method was developed and used t
o determine the infection rate of Kneallhazia solenopsae in individual Pseudacte
on curvatus flies in north-central Florida. Among P. curvatus flies infected wit
h K. solenopsae, 2 amplicons were produced, one of 800 nucleotides from the P. c
urvatus 18S rRNA gene, and one of 318 nucleotides from the K. solenopsae 16S rRN
A gene. Multiplex PCR of DNA extracted from P. curvatus flies was capable of det
ecting 117.5 +- 82.7 K. solenopsae spore equivalents. The mean K. solenopsae inf
ection rate of P. curvatus from 4 sites in Gainesville and Williston, Florida, w
as 12.3 +- 5.0%. The K. solenopsae infection rate for P. curvatus was independen
t of the K. solenopsae infection rate observed among S. invicta nests from where
 the fly collections took place. Not all P. curvatus flies that developed in K. 
solenopsae -infected fire ants were positive for K. solenopsae upon eclosion.  A
mong 50 P. curvatus flies known to develop in K. solenopsae -infected S. invicta
 workers, 12 (24%) were positive for K. solenopsae at eclosion.   (This article 
was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is
 therefore in the public domain.)          *Kneallhazia solenopsae was Thelohani
a solenopsae.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 09; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Valles_et_al-2009(M-4430).pdf   or pdf available through http://hdl
.handle.net/10113/35144   or pdf available through html  https://bioone.org/jour
nals/florida-entomologist/volume-92/issue-2/024.092.0220/Kneallhazia-Thelohania-
Solenopsae-Infection-Rate-of-Pseudacteon-curvatus-Flies-Determined/10.1653/024.0
92.0220.full \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47710\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Oi, D.H. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2010\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonal variation and the co-occurrence of four p
athogens and a group of parasites among monogyne and polygyne fire ant colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  54(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  342-348\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2010\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonal variation and the co-occurrence of 
four pathogens and a group of parasites among monogyne and polygyne fire ant col
onies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control: theory and applica
tion in pest management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocontrol.2010.06.006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-24, June 11\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; monogyny; polygyny; colonies; genetic
s; genotype; seasonal variability; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; pathogen;
 Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon tricu
spis; microsporidian; Kneallhazia solenopsae; virus; SINV-1; SINV-2; SINV-3; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A year-long survey was conducted to determine t
he seasonality and co-occurrence of four pathogens and a group of parasites in c
olonies of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, in north-central Flori
da.  Solenopsis invicta colonies were sampled and examined for the presence of P
seudacteon spp. (P. curvatus, P. tricuspis, P. obtusus) parasitic phorid flies, 
a microsporidian pathogen (Kneallhazia solenopsae) and 3 S. invicta viruses (SIN
V-1, SINV-2, and SINV-3) by PCR or RT-PCR methods. In addition, the social form 
designation of each colony (single- or multiple-queen) was determined by genotyp
ing worker ants at the Gp-9 locus to determine if the pathogens or parasites wer
e associated with monogyne or polygyne fire ant colonies.  Seasonal variability 
was observed in the prevalence of all pathogens/parasites examined, with SINV-1,
 SINV-3, and K. solenopsae exhibiting pronounced seasonality.  SINV-1 and K. sol
enopsae infections were most prevalent among colonies during warmer periods of t
he year, while SINV-3 was most prevalent during the cooler periods. As hypothesi
zed, pathogens were found more commonly in polygyne colonies than in monogyne co
lonies. Infection comparisons by social form revealed higher infection rates of 
K. solenopsae and SINV-2 in polygyne colony samples compared with monogyne colon
y samples. The overall colony infection and parasitism rate among the 360 coloni
es sampled, regardless of social form, was 60.3% (SINV-1), 8.9% (SINV-2), 10.8% 
(SINV-3), 22.5% (K. solenopsae), and 8.1% (Pseudacteon flies). An interesting pa
ttern was observed between the number of different pathogens or parasites detect
ed in monogyne and polygyne colonies. The majority of monogyne colonies (>80%) w
ere either uninfected or infected or parasitized with only a single pathogen/par
asite while the majority of polygyne colonies (>55%) were infected or parasitize
d with 2 or more pathogens/parasites simultaneously.  Higher pathogen/parasite p
revalence among polygyne colonies is attributed to lower genetic relatedness (am
ong nestmates), increased colony longevity, and the proclivity of polygyne colon
ies to share workers, brood and queens among their interconnected colonies.  Eva
luation of pairwise co-occurrence data indicated that the pathogens and fly para
sites were usually independently distributed among host colonies; however, unkno
wn local factors did cause several significant deviations from expected values. 
  (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offic
ial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-5052.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=45
050&content=PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publi
cations/Valles_et_al-2010(M-5052).pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/
45050/PDF   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.net/10113/45050 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32550\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire ant c
olonies (Solenopsis invicta) by multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  50(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  199-200\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire
 ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) by multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00040-003-0662-8\par }
{\f1\fs28\b PMCID:}{\f1\fs28  3790\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-27, Dec 11\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; genetics; multiplex PCR; G
p-9 alleles; alleles; genotype; genetic variation; polymerase chain reaction; DN
A primers; multiplex polymerase chain reaction; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Oligonucleotide primers were designed to dis-cr
iminate between the Gp-9 B and Gp-9 b alleles found in monogyne and polygyne col
onies of fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren. Primers specific for the Gp-9 B all
ele produced a 517 bp amplicon and primers specific for Gp-9 b allele pro-duced 
a 423 bp amplicon. When both sets of primers were multiplexed, homozygous monogy
ne ants produced a single 517 bp amplicon (specific for Gp-9 B), whereas heteroz
ygous polygyne ants produced one 517 bp amplicon and one 423 bp amplicon (specif
ic for Gp-9 B and Gp-9 b, respectively) which allowed the Gp-9 alleles to be dis
cerned in a single reaction. This method was tested on ants from 20 monogyne col
onies and 20 polygyne colonies and was 100% accurate in dis-criminating the two 
forms.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) o
n official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Valles_and_Porter-2003(M-3790).pdf   or   http://hdl.handle.net/101
13/2574   or   http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.623.5546
&rep=rep1&type=pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 48154\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire ant c
olonies (Solenopsis invicta) by Multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles.  [poster paper]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 116, In: L. Greenberg & C. Lerner [ed.], 
Proceedings of the 2003 Red Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 30-April 1, 2003
, Palm Springs, CA, 145 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Identification of polygyne and monogyne fire
 ant colonies (Solenopsis invicta) by Multiplex PCR of Gp-9 alleles.  [poster pa
per]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08; IN: a-2003_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; polygyny; monogyny; Multiplex PCR; Gp-9 allele
s; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 21 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/0/03/2003_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36631\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon decapitating flies: potential vectors 
of a fire ant virus?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  90(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  282-283\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon decapitating flies: potential ve
ctors of a fire ant virus?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2007)90[268:PDFPVO
]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-8, July 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasitoid; D
iptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon litoralis; virus vector; inse
ct viruses; positive sense; single-stranded RNA viruses; vector potential; virus
 transmission; infection; Solenopsis invicta virus; Dicistroviridae; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Although SINV does not appear to infect Pseudac
teon decapitating flies, horizontal transmission of SINV could occur mechanicall
y from contamination of the ovipositor.  This type of virus vectoring has been r
eported previously and is the primary route of transmission among some ascovirus
es in Lepidoptera.  However, SINV infection of S. invicta appears to be limited 
to cells of the digestive tract, especially the midgut. Further, we have not det
ected SINV in the hemolymph of infected fire ants.  Thus, it is unlikely that ov
iposition into the hemocoel by Pseudacteon decapitating flies would result in SI
NV contamination of the ovipositor.  Indeed, flies allowed to oviposit in SINV-i
nfected fire ants for several hours were all negative for SINV.  However, mechan
ical transmission still could have occurred, but was not detectable by the RT-PC
R method employed; the limit of detection of SINV by RT-PCR is estimated to be b
etween 50 and 100 copies.  Our results indicate that SINV does not replicate wit
hin Pseudacteon decapitating flies that parasitize S. invicta.  Flies appeared t
o develop normally from SINV-infected S. invicta workers.  Mechanical transmissi
on of SINV to uninfected ants by oviposition appears unlikely.   (This article w
as written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is 
therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Valles_and_Porter-2007(M-4176).pdf   or pdf available through  http
://hdl.handle.net/10113/8491   or pdf available through html https://bioone.org/
journals/florida-entomologist/volume-90/issue-1/0015-4040(2007)90[268:PDFPVO]2.0
.CO;2/PSEUDACTEON-DECAPITATING-FLIES--POTENTIAL-VECTORS-OF-A-FIRE-ANT/10.1653/00
15-4040(2007)90[268:PDFPVO]2.0.CO;2.full \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 57680\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Procedures to mitigate the impact of Solenopsis in
victa Virus 3 in fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) rearing facilities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  96(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  252-254\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Procedures to mitigate the impact of Solenop
sis invicta Virus 3 in fire ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) rearing facilities\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-36, Nov 13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; nests; Solenopsis invicta Virus 3; SI
NV-3; bleach; sodium hypochlorite; UV radiation; mechanical movement; infectious
 dust particles; rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  During the initial characterization of Solenops
is invicta virus 3 (SINV-3), virus-infected fire ant colonies were retrieved fro
m the field and maintained in the laboratory rearing facility at the USDA-ARS CM
AVE, Gainesville, FL. During this time, all uninfected S. invicta colonies house
d in the facility contracted SINV-3 infections. Virus infection in fire ant rear
ing facilities and methods to render the virus inactive and to limit its impact 
on fire ant rearing are described.   (This article was written and prepared by U
.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public doma
in.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 14; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/82187/7
9288   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.096.0138   or html http://
www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.096.0138 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62596\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dose response of red imported fire ant colonies to
 Solenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Arch. Virol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  160(10)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  2407-2413\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  October 2015; online 11 July 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Dose response of red imported fire ant colon
ies to Solenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Archives of Virology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/s00705-015-2520-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-87, Jul 21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colonies; symbiont; myrmecophile; pat
hogen; virus; Dicistroviridae; Aparavirus; Solenopsis invicta virus-1; SINV-3; d
ose response; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Baiting tests were conducted to evaluate the ef
fect of increasing Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) dose on fire ant colonies
. Actively growing early-stage fire ant (Solenopsis invicta Buren) laboratory co
lonies were pulse-exposed for 24 hours to six concentrations of SINV-3 (101, 103
, 105, 107, 109 genome equivalents/\u956?l) in 1 ml of a 10 % sucrose bait and m
onitored regularly for two months. SINV-3 concentration had a significant effect
 on colony health. Brood rating (proportion of brood to worker ants) began to de
part from the control group at 19 days for the 109 concentration and 26 days for
 the 107 concentration. At 60 days, brood rating was significantly lower among c
olonies treated with 109, 107, and 105 SINV-3 concentrations. The intermediate c
oncentration, 105, appeared to cause a chronic, low-level infection with one col
ony (n = 9) supporting virus replication. Newly synthesized virus was not detect
ed in any fire ant colonies treated at the 101 concentration, indicating that ac
tive infections failed to be established at this level of exposure. The highest 
bait concentration chosen, 109, appeared most effective from a control aspect; m
ean colony brood rating at this concentration (1.1 \u177? 0.9 at the 60 day time
 point) indicated poor colony health with minimal brood production. No clear rel
ationship was observed between the quantity of plus genome strand detected and b
rood rating. Conversely, there was a strong relationship between the presence of
 the replicative genome strand and declining brood rating, which may serve as a 
predictor of disease severity. Recommendations for field treatment levels to con
trol fire ants with SINV-3 are discussed.   (This article was written and prepar
ed by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the publ
ic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00705
-015-2520-1.pdf   or html  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00705-015-
2520-1 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 71427\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2019\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence of temperature on the pathogenicity of S
olenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Invertebr. Pathol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  166, 107217\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  ?? p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 2019; online 17 July 2019\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Influence of temperature on the pathogenicit
y of Solenopsis invicta virus 3\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Invertebrate Pathology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2019.107217\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; caste; colonies; temperature; symbion
t; myrmecophile; pathogens; biopesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; s
ingle-stranded RNA virus; Picornavirales; Solinviviridae; Red imported fire ant;
 biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Field evaluations assessing the prevalence of S
olenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) have shown that the virus exhibits a distinct
 seasonal phenology in the host, Solenopsis invicta, that is negatively correlat
ed with warmer temperatures. Active SINV-3 infections were established in Soleno
psis invicta colonies, which were subsequently maintained at 19.1, 22.2, 25.5, 2
7.7, and 29.3 \u176?C. Brood ratings declined in all SINV-3-treated colonies reg
ardless of temperature over the initial 30 days. However, brood ratings in colon
ies held at 29.3 \u176?C began increasing in the next 40 days until they were st
atistically equivalent to ratings for untreated control colonies. Meanwhile, bro
od rating continued to decline in colonies held at 19.1, 22.2, 25.5, and 27.7 \u176
?C for the duration of the test (81 days). By the end of the test, these colonie
s were in poor health as indicated by brood ratings in the 1 to 1.5 range. Conve
rsely, the mean brood rating for colonies held at 29.3 \u176?C increased to abov
e 3, indicating vigorous growth. Worker ants from SINV-3-treated colonies mainta
ined at 19.1, 22.2, and 25.5 \u176?C showed strong production of the VP2 capsid 
protein by Western blotting; 100% of the colonies sampled (n = 3) showed product
ion of VP2. However, VP2 was detected in only 33% of colonies maintained at 27.7
 \u176?C, and the VP2 response was nearly undetectable in all colonies maintaine
d at 29.3 \u176?C. These results indicate that virus assembly does not appear to
 be occurring efficiently at the higher temperatures. Also, the quantity of SINV
-3 detected in queens was significantly lower in those maintained at 29.3 \u176?
C compared with the lower temperature treatments. These results indicate that wa
rm summer temperatures combined with fire ant thermoregulatory behavior and perh
aps behavioral fevers may explain the low prevalence of SINV-3 in fire ant colon
ies during the summer.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Governme
nt employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  (view open manuscript)  https://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/abs/pii/S0022201119301624?via%3Dihub \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 70569\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Porter, S.D. and Calcaterra, L.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Prospecting for viral natural enemies of the fire 
ant Solenopsis invicta in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  PLoS ONE\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  13(2), e0192377\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  17 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  published February 21, 2018\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Prospecting for viral natural enemies of the
 fire ant Solenopsis invicta in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  PLoS ONE\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192377\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-69, Jun 19\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Argentina; scientific; workers; genetics; genome; genomic libra
ries; sequence databases; cDNA libraries; sequence assembly tools; RNA sequence 
analysis; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; Dicistroviridae; viral pathog
ens; Solenopsis invicta virus 5; SINV-5; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Metagenomics and next generation sequencing wer
e employed to discover new virus natural enemies of the fire ant, Solenopsis inv
icta Buren in its native range (i.e., Formosa, Argentina) with the ultimate goal
 of testing and releasing new viral pathogens into U.S. S. invicta populations t
o provide natural, sustainable control of this ant. RNA was purified from worker
 ants from 182 S. invicta colonies, which was pooled into 4 groups according to 
location. A gene library was created from each group and sequenced using Illumin
a Miseq technology. After a series of winnowing methods to remove S. invicta gen
es, known S. invicta virus genes, and all other non-virus gene sequences, 61,944
 unique singletons were identified with virus identity. These were assembled de 
novo yielding 171 contiguous sequences with significant identity to non-plant vi
rus genes. Fifteen contiguous sequences exhibited very high expression rates and
 were detected in all four gene libraries. One contig (Contig_29) exhibited the 
highest expression level overall and across all four gene libraries. Random ampl
ification of cDNA ends analyses expanded this contiguous sequence yielding a com
plete virus genome, which we have provisionally named Solenopsis invicta virus 5
 (SINV-5). SINV-5 is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus with genome cha
racteristics consistent with the Dicistroviridae. The replicative genome strand 
of SINV-5 was detected in worker ants indicating that S. invicta serves as host 
for the virus. Many additional sequences were identified that are likely of vira
l origin. These sequences await further investigation to determine their origins
 and relationship with S. invicta. This study expands knowledge of the diversity
 and relative frequencies of RNA sequences associated with the virome of S. invi
cta.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on 
official time and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 21; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  7.4 MB  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/fi
le?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0192377&type=printable   or 7.4 MB  https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5821328/pdf/pone.0192377.pdf   or 7.4 MB  https://eu
ropepmc.org/backend/ptpmcrender.fcgi?accid=PMC5821328&blobtype=pdf   or html  ht
tps://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0192377   or htm
l  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5821328/   or html  https://euro
pepmc.org/articles/pmc5821328 \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplemental information available through  https://journals.plos.org/
plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0192377#sec013 \par }
{\f1\fs28 S1 Table. Oligonucleotide primers and their purpose from experiments i
n this study.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192377.s001  (DOCX).\par }
{\f1\fs28 S2 Table. Contiguous sequences comprised of fewer than 50 singletons w
ith significant viral identity by BLASTX analysis of the GenBank database from R
NA libraries created from Solenopsis invicta worker ants.  https://doi.org/10.13
71/journal.pone.0192377.s002  (DOCX).\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 59709\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Porter, S.D., Choi, M.Y. and Oi, D.
H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Successful transmission of Solenopsis invicta viru
s 3 to Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonies in oil, sugar, and cricket bait form
ulations\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Invertebr. Pathol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  113(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  198-204\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2013; Epub April 17, 2013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Successful transmission of Solenopsis invict
a virus 3 to Solenopsis invicta fire ant colonies in oil, sugar, and cricket bai
t formulations\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Invertebrate Pathology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/j.jip.2013.04.003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogens; bi
opesticides; Solenopsis invicta virus 3; SINV-3; single-stranded RNA virus; Pico
rnavirales; Red imported fire ant; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Tests were conducted to evaluate whether Soleno
psis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) could be delivered in various bait formulations to
 fire ant colonies and measure the corresponding colony health changes associate
d with virus infection in Solenopsis invicta. Three bait formulations (10% sugar
 solution, cricket paste, and soybean oil adsorbed to defatted corn grit) effect
ively transmitted SINV-3 infections to S. invicta colonies. Correspondingly, vir
al infection was shown to be detrimental to colony health and productivity. By d
ay 32, all ant colonies exposed to a single 24 h pulse treatment of SINV-3 becam
e infected with the virus regardless of the bait formulation. However, the SINV-
3 sugar and cricket bait-treated colonies became infected more rapidly than the 
oil-treated colonies. Sugar and cricket-treated colonies exhibited significant d
eclines in their brood ratings compared with the untreated control and oil bait-
treated colonies. Measures of colony health and productivity evaluated at the en
d of the study (day 47) showed a number of differences among the bait treatments
 and the control group. Statistically significant and similar patterns were exhi
bited among treatments for the quantity of live workers (lower), live brood (low
er), total colony weight (lower), worker mortality (higher), proportion larvae (
lower), and queen weight (lower). Significant changes were also observed in the 
number of eggs laid by queens (lower) and the corresponding ovary rating in SINV
-3-treated colonies. The study provides the first successful demonstration of SI
NV-3 as a potential biopesticide against fire ants.   (This article was written 
and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore i
n the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 15; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 60861\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Porter, S.D. and Firth, A.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2014\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: pathogenesis and stage
 specificity in red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Virology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  460-461\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  66-71\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2014; Available online 29 May 2014\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta virus 3: pathogenesis and
 stage specificity in red imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Virology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/j.virol.2014.04.026\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-51, Jan 17\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; workers; behavior; tropism; Solenopsi
s invicta Virus 3; SINV-3; caste; RNA virus; pathogenesis; stage specificity; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Solenopsis invicta colonies were exposed to pur
ified preparations of Solenopsis invicta virus 3 (SINV-3) to investigate virus p
athogenesis at the colony level. Time course experiments revealed an infection e
xhibiting specificity for the adult stage (workers). SINV-3 genome and a capsid 
protein were increasingly present in worker ants with time. Northern blot analys
is revealed two bands in RNA preparations from worker ants infected with SINV-3 
corresponding to the genomic and sub-genomic species. Conversely, larval RNA pre
parations from SINV-3-infected colonies showed a near-complete absence of SINV-3
 genome or sub-genome. The data confirm that SINV-3 is the etiological agent cau
sing mortality among S. invicta colonies in the laboratory. We propose that SINV
-3 infection somehow alters worker ant behavior, which may prevent them from acq
uiring and/or distributing solid food to the larvae. Consequently, larval mortal
ity and impaired queen health occur as a result of starvation or neglect by the 
worker caste.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employ
ee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 15; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.2 MB  http://ac.els-cdn.com/S0042682214001494/1-s2
.0-S0042682214001494-main.pdf?_tid=c5b73ce4-dba7-11e6-b8f0-00000aab0f02&acdnat=1
484542610_0f71b3c4f710dd24e01d4c45466a8017   or html http://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/pii/S0042682214001494 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36637\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Strong, C.A., Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D
., Pereira, R.M., Vander Meer, R.K., Hashimoto, Y., Hooper-B\u249?i, L.M., S\u225
?nchez-Arroyo, H., Davis, T., Karpakakunjaram, V., Vail, K.M., Graham, L.C., Bri
ano, J.A., Calcaterra, L.A., Gilbert, L.E., Ward, R., Ward, K., Oliver, J.B., Ta
niguchi, G. and Thompson, D.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phenology, distribution, and host specificity of S
olenopsis invicta virus-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Invertebr. Pathol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  96(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  18-27\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Sept. 2007; Epub ahead of print Feb. 25, 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Phenology, distribution, and host specificit
y of Solenopsis invicta virus-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Invertebrate Pathology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2007.02.006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex; Camponotus; Card
iocondyla; Cyphomyrmex; Dorymyrmex; Formica; Hypoponera; Linepithema; Monomorium
; Neivamyrmex; Odontomachus; Paratrechina; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Solenopsis ca
rolinensis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis pergandii; Solen
opsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta X richteri hybrid; Solenopsis xyloni; Trachym
yrmex; Xenomyrmex; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; P
onerinae; North America; Mexico; USA; Alabama; California; Florida; Georgia; Haw
aii; Louisiana; Mississippi; New Mexico; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Te
xas; South America; Argentina; scientific; seasonal; phenology; seasonal variati
on; temperature; distribution; host specificity; Solenopsis invicta virus-1; SIN
V-1; SINV-1A; Dicistroviridae; Solenopsis invicta virus-1A; nucleotide sequences
; sequence homology; positive sense; single-stranded RNA viruses; insect viruses
; disease prevalence; phylogeny; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Studies were conducted to examine the phenology
, geographic distribution, and host specificity of the Solenopsis invicta virus-
1 (SINV-1). Two genotypes examined, SINV-1 and -1A, exhibited similar seasonal p
revalence patterns. Infection rates among colonies of S. invicta in Gainesville,
 Florida, were lowest from early winter (December) to early spring (April) incre
asing rapidly in late spring (May) and remaining high through August before decl
ining again in the fall (September/October). Correlation analysis revealed a sig
nificant relationship between mean monthly temperature and SINV-1 (p<0.0005, r=0
.82) and SINV-1A (p<0.0001, r=0.86) infection rates in S. invicta colonies. SINV
-1 was widely distributed among S. invicta populations. The virus was detected i
n S. invicta from Argentina and from all U.S. states examined, with the exceptio
n of New Mexico. SINV-1 and -1A were also detected in other Solenopsis species. 
SINV-1 was detected in Solenopsis richteri and the S. invicta/richteri hybrid co
llected from northern Alabama and Solenopsis geminata from Florida. SINV-1A was 
detected in S. geminata and Solenopsis carolinensis in Florida and the S. invict
a/richteri hybrid in Alabama. Of the 1989 arthropods collected from 6 pitfall tr
ap experiments from Gainesville and Williston, Florida, none except S. invicta t
ested positive for SINV-1 or SINV-1A. SINV-1 did not appear to infect or replica
te within Sf9 or Dm-2 cells in vitro. The number of SINV-1 genome copies did not
 significantly increase over the course of the experiment, nor were any cytopath
ic effects observed. Phylogenetic analyses of SINV-1/-1A nucleotide sequences in
dicated significant divergence between viruses collected from Argentina and the 
U.S.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on 
official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=43
97&content=PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/public
ations/Valles_et_al-2007(M-4226).pdf   or pdf available through http://hdl.handl
e.net/10113/4397 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62597\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Valles, S.M., Wetterer, J.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The Red Imported Fire Ant (Hymenoptera: Formicidae
) in the West Indies: Distribution of natural enemies and a possible test bed fo
r release of self-sustaining biocontrol agents\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  98(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1101-1105\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The Red Imported Fire Ant (Hymenoptera: Form
icidae) in the West Indies: Distribution of natural enemies and a possible test 
bed for release of self-sustaining biocontrol agents\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1653/024.098.0414\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-46, Apr 16\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; Anguilla; Antigua; Bahamas; Great Stirrup Cay; New Providence; 
Barbuda; Grand Cayman; Jamaica; Montserrat; Nevis; Puerto Rico; Isla de Vieques;
 Virgin Islands; Saint Croix; Saint Kitts; Saint John; Saint Martin; Saint Thoma
s; Tortola; Turks & Caicos; Providenciales; South America; Aruba; Trinidad; scie
ntific; monogyny; polygyny; distribution; nests; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathoge
n; parasite; parasitoid; microsporidia; Kneallhazia solenopsae; Vairimorpha invi
ctae; virus; RNA virus; SINV; densovirus; SiDNV; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon 
curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; tuna baits; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Sample collections of Solenopsis invicta Buren 
(Hymenoptera: Formicidae) were taken from 20 islands of the West Indies and eval
uated for the presence of key pathogens and parasites of this invasive pest ant.
 We hypothesized that bottleneck events during the introduction of this ant spec
ies in the West Indies would have resulted in populations devoid, or nearly so, 
of natural enemies. Monogyne and polygyne social forms were found throughout the
 islands surveyed with monogyny being more prevalent (65%) compared with polygyn
y (35%). Among 254 samples, only 25 (~10%) tested positive for the presence of p
athogens or parasites. The microsporidian Kneallhazia solenopsae was the most pr
evalent pathogen detected; it was found in 20 colonies. A second microsporidian 
species, Vairimorpha invictae, was shown to be present in a polygyne sample coll
ected from St. Croix -- the first detection of this pathogen outside South Ameri
ca. Similarly, Solenopsis invicta densovirus (SiDNV) was detected in one polygyn
e sample from Anguilla. SiDNV is not found in S. invicta U.S. populations, so th
is detection also represents the first geographic discovery outside of South Ame
rica. Two species of Pseudacteon decapitating flies were found to have dispersed
 into the Bahamas. Utilization of the islands of the West Indies for release, es
tablishment, and impact assessment of S. invicta natural enemies is discussed.  
 (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offici
al time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.3 MB  http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/024.09
8.0414   or 1.4 MB http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/84445/84171   or
 1.4 MB pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/84445
   or 1.6 MB pdf available through https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2891
26165_The_Red_Imported_Fire_Ant_Hymenoptera_Formicidae_in_the_West_Indies_Distri
bution_of_Natural_Enemies_and_a_Possible_Test_Bed_for_Release_of_Self-Sustaining
_Biocontrol_Agents   or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/024.098.0414
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 Supplementary material for this article in Florida Entomologist 98(4) 
(Dec 2015) is online at http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/entomologist/browse \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29029\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Jouvenaz, D.P. and Wojcik, D.P
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid (Hymenoptera: Euc
haritidae) of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Chem. Ecol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  15(8)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  2247-2261\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  August 1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in a parasitoid (Hymenopter
a: Eucharitidae) of fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Chemical Ecology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01014113\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; Mato Grosso; Mato Grosso do Sul; scientific; chemistry;
 cuticular hydrocarbons; behavior; nestmate recognition; mimicry; parasite; Hyme
noptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A wasp (Orasema sp.) parasitic on the fire ant,
 Solenopsis invicta Buren, develops to the adult stage within the ant colony, wh
ere wasp larvae are ectoparasitic on ant pupae. This phase of the parasite's lif
e cycle requires a mechanism of integration into the host colony. Gas chromatogr
aphic profiles of hexane soaks of various stages of the parasite and host sugges
t that during development within the ant colony the parasite acquires the colony
 odor of the host through a passive mechanism, based on simple contact and other
 social interactions. No parasite-specific components were observed. After leavi
ng the host nest as adults, the parasite biosynthesizes a parasite-specific cuti
cular compound, while retaining residual amounts of the host acquired components
. This complicated scenario is consistent with current knowledge of nestmate rec
ognition and the preferential treatment of ant workers to their brood.   (This a
rticle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time,
 and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2129.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=23158&content=PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/661510
15/publications/Vander_Meer_et_al-1989(M-2129).pdf   or   http://cache.ucr.edu/~
heraty/literature%20copy/VanderJoWo1989.PDF   or   http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~h
eraty/literature%20copy/VanderJoWo1989.PDF  or   http://www.springerlink.com/con
tent/x530615731v1236m/fulltext.pdf   or   http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/231
58/PDF   or pdf available through  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/catal
og.xhtml?id=23158&start=0&searchText=Blomquist%2C+G.J.&searchField=&sortField= \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29060\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fate of newly mated queens introduced into monogyn
e and polygyne Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  94(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  289-297\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 March 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fate of newly mated queens introduced into m
onogyne and polygyne Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) colonies\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1603/0013-8746(2001)094[0289:FONM
QI]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; colony; nest; queens; monogyny; polyg
yny; caste; wings; queen pheromones; olfactory stimulation; nestmate recognition
; workers; alates; dealates; behavior; aggressive behavior; aggression; olfactom
eters; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Nestmate recognition is of prime importance in 
maintaining ant colony integration and organization. Monogyne red imported fire 
ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, colonies are highly territorial and aggressive to
ward non-nestmate conspecific workers. In contrast, workers from polygyne nests 
in the United States show no aggression toward workers from other conspecific co
lonies (polygyne or monogyne). Nests within a polygyne population form a 'superc
olony,' with free exchange of workers and food between nests. The difference in 
conspecific nestmate recognition is a major distinguishing feature of the two S.
 invicta forms in the United States. We report here the discovery of an exceptio
n to this dichotomy. High levels of worker aggression are released by the introd
uction of newly mated queens into both polygyne and monogyne colonies. This sugg
ests that nestmate recognition involving female sexuals does not follow the same
 mechanism used to explain nestmate recognition behavior between workers.   (Thi
s article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official ti
me, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.1 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/6
6151015/publications/Vander_Meer_and_Porter-2001(M-3580).pdf   or 0.2 MB  http:/
/aesa.oxfordjournals.org/content/aesa/94/2/289.full.pdf   or 1.1 MB  https://www
.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publications/Vander_Meer_and_Porter-2001(M-3
580).pdf   or 0.2 MB pdf available through html  https://academic.oup.com/aesa/a
rticle/94/2/289/187166 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47506\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential applications of the response of phorid f
lies to fire ant semiochemicals.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 33, In: S.B. Vinson, S. Ellison, & D. Bus
h [compiliers], Proceedings of the Southwestern ESA Branch Fire Ant Symposia and
 the 2001 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, Feb. 28-March 2, 2001, San Anto
nio, Texas, 260 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential applications of the response of ph
orid flies to fire ant semiochemicals.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; electrical stimulation; semiochemical
s; symbiont; myrmecophile; Parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; 
Pseudacteon tricuspis; rearing; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Electrical stimulation of fire ants induces the
m to release semiochemicals. We discovered that these semiochemicals activate re
sting phorid fly parasites to fly toward the odor source and then attack the ant
s. We have adapted the electrical stimulation system to rearing boxes to test wh
ether or not the production of flies can be increased using this method. The res
ults from our first attempts at improving phorid fly (Pseudacteon tricuspis) rea
ring using electrical stimulation showed the following in paired treatment/contr
ol comparisons: there were 29% more attacking flies in the treatments, which res
ulted in a mean increase in fly production of 19%. These first results are highl
y encouraging and point to the potential of this method in increasing rearing ef
ficiency. We hope to demonstrate in the future that with this method fewer flies
 will have to be cycled back into rearing to achieve the desired production rate
, thus providing more flies for release. A preliminary study of the effects of f
ire ant electrical stimulation and rearing efficiency of another phorid fly, Pse
udacteon curvatus, also indicates production increases. These semiochemicals hav
e great potential in phorid fly rearing and in the development of an efficient a
nd specific trap for phorid fly detection in the field. Research to isolate and 
identify the active compounds is underway.   (This article was written and prepa
red by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pub
lic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 16.6 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/4/44/2001_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. worker alarm pheromo
nes attract Pseudacteon phorid flies. [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 77-80, In: D. Suiter, et al., [compiliers
], Proceedings of the 2002 Imported Fire Ant Conference, 24-26 March 2002, Athen
s, GA, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. worker alarm p
heromones attract Pseudacteon phorid flies. [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; worker; alarm pheromones; Pseudacteon
 tricuspis; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The parasitic phorid fly, Psedacteon tricuspis 
was found to be attracted to the volatile compounds released by shaken fire ant 
workers.  Among the compounds released were alarm pheromones, venom alkaloids, a
nd recruitment pheromones.  In subsequent bioassays we eliminated poison sac con
tents and recruitment pheromones as possible attractants. We have demonstrated t
he involvement of alarm pheromones in the attraction of this phorid fly to their
 host fire ant.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government empl
oyee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3946.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or in this 10.7 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/a/a6/2002_I
FA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 62177\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2015\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biochemical evidence for cryptic Solenopsis specie
s that are morphologically S. invicta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 48, In: T. Schowalter, [compilier], Proce
edings of the 2014 Imported Fire Ant and Invasive Pest Ant Conference, New Orlea
ns, LA, USA, April 6-8, 2015, 89 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biochemical evidence for cryptic Solenopsis 
species that are morphologically S. invicta.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-45, Feb 16, IN: a-2015_Annual_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; scientific; chemistry; venom alk
aloids; cuticular hydrocarbons; morphology; Dufour's glands; recruitment pheromo
nes; taxonomy; distribution; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Biochemical analyses of  > 180 colonies from no
rthern Argentina indicate the presence of three distinct chemical patterns, incl
uding that of S. invicta from the USA. Morphologically the three chemotypes are 
indistinguishable. Where these chemotypes are collected sympatrically, there is 
no indication of introgression. The venom alkaloids and cuticular hydrocarbons a
re biosynthesized by distinctly different pathways and can be considered indepen
dent chemotaxonomic characters. In addition, analyses of Dufour's glands, the so
urce of recruitment pheromones, showed the presence of the major sesquiterpene f
ound in USA S. invicta Dufour's glands from one of the Argentina S. invicta chem
otypes, but not from the other two Argentina chemotypes.  This is excellent evid
ence for morphologically cryptic species of Solenopsis in northern Argentina.   
(This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee (s) on offici
al time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 16; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4 MB file http://articles.extension.org/site
s/default/files/2015%20Conference%20Proceedings_0.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 To access the 1984 - 2015 Proceedings use the following link:  \par }
{\f1\fs28 http://www.extension.org/pages/Proceedings_of_the_Imported_Fire_Ant_Co
nference \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32978\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Porter, S.D., Oi, D.H., Valles
, S.M. and Pereira, R.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant populat
ions.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  p. 78-79, In: FAO/IAEA International conferen
ce: Area-wide control of insects.  Integrating the sterile insect and related an
t other techniques.  9-13 May 2005, Vienna International Centre, Vienna, Austria
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Book of extended synopses\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  IAEA-CN-131\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant p
opulations.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Dec 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmec
ophile; pathogen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenelli
dae; Vairimorpha invictae; entomopathogenic protozoa; parasitoid; Diptera; Phori
dae; Pseudacteon; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ants, Solenopsis invicta and Solenopsi
s richteri, were inadvertently introduced into the United States early in the 19
00s and currently inhabit over 150 million hectares in Puerto Rico and twelve so
uthern states from Texas to Virginia. Imported fire ants have also become establ
ished in isolated sites in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Maryland. The fi
re ant's large numbers and potent sting have resulted in significant medical, ag
ricultural, and environmental impacts. The population densities in the U.S. are 
5-10 times higher than in South America, most likely due to their escape from na
tural enemies. Recently, biological control agents have become available for int
roduction into the United States, e.g. phorid fly parasites and a microsporidian
 pathogen, setting the stage for integrated fire ant management. An areawide fir
e ant management project proposal was funded by USDA/ARS Headquarters to demonst
rate control of fire ant populations over large areas using commercially availab
le insecticide bait and self-sustaining biological control agents. Control and t
reatment demonstration sites (120ha + periphery) were set up in each of five sta
tes (Florida, Oklahoma, Texas, South Carolina, and Mississippi). The control and
 treatment sites both had bait (hydramethylnon and methoprene) applications, but
 only the treatment site had biocontrol agents released around the periphery. Af
ter 3.5 years phorid fly parasites have been established at the demonstration si
tes. The microsporidian pathogen is established in all sites except Mississippi.
 Fire ant populations have been reduced by 85-99% in the treatment demonstration
 sites. Environmental assessment has demonstrated that bait toxicants do affect 
non-target ant species that would otherwise play a role in decreasing fire ant r
einfestation rates. Educational outreach activities resulted in informative broc
hures, the establishment of a program website, videos, and general information o
n fire ants. The research component has responded with additional biocontrol org
anisms and better pathogen detection methods.   (This article was written and pr
epared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the 
public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-3994.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  0.3 MB   }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Us
erFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Vander_Meer_et_al-2005(M-3994).pdf}{\f1\fs28 
   or in this 6.5 MB file  https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_
Public/36/060/36060887.pdf?r=1&r=1 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 44195\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Porter, S.D., Oi, D.H., Valles
, S.M. and Pereira, R.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant populat
ions\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Vreysen, M.J.B., Robinson, A.S. and Hendrichs, J.
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Area-Wide Control of Insect Pests: From Resea
rch to Field Implementation\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Dordrecht, The Netherlands\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Springer\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  487-496\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Area-wide suppression of invasive fire ant p
opulations\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6059-5_45\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, July 09\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  not copied\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; baits; 
area-wide; integrated pest management; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; patho
gen; Microsporidia; Thelohaniidae; Thelohania solenopsae; Burenellidae; Vairimor
pha invictae; entomopathogenic protozoa; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudact
eon; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ants Solenopsis invicta Buren and Sole
nopsis richteri Forel were inadvertently introduced into the USA early in the 19
00s and currently inhabit over 150 million hectares in Puerto Rico and twelve so
uthern states from Texas to Virginia. Imported fire ants have also become establ
ished in isolated sites in Arizona, California, Maryland, and New Mexico. The la
rge numbers and potent sting of fire ants have resulted in significant medical, 
agricultural, and environmental impacts. The population densities in the USA are
 five to ten times higher than in South America, most likely due to their escape
 from natural enemies. Recently, biological control agents have become available
 in the USA, e.g. Pseudacteon spp. decapitating fly parasitoids and a microspori
dian pathogen Thelohania solenopsae Knell, Allen & Hazard, setting the stage for
 integrated fire ant management. An area-wide fire ant management project propos
al was funded by United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research S
ervices headquarters to demonstrate control of fire ant populations over large a
reas using commercially available insecticide baits and self-sustaining biologic
al control agents. Untreated, bait control and integrated pest management (IPM) 
demonstration sites (120 hectares and periphery) were set up in each of five sta
tes (Florida, Mississippi, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas). The control and 
IPM sites both had bait (hydramethylnon and methoprene) applications, but only t
he IPM site had biological control agents released around the periphery. After 3
.5 years, decapitating fly parasites have been established at the demonstration 
sites. The microsporidian pathogen is established in all sites except Mississipp
i. Fire ant populations have been reduced by 85-99% in the IPM demonstration sit
es as compared to untreated areas of the same sites. Environmental assessment ha
s demonstrated that bait toxicants do affect non-target ant species but do not a
ffect the arthropod species richness. Educational outreach activities resulted i
n informative brochures, the establishment of a programme web site, videos, and 
general information on fire ants. The research component has responded with addi
tional biological control organisms and better pathogen detection methods.   (Th
is article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official t
ime, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Vander_Meer_et_al-2007(M-4250).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in the myrmecophilous beetle Myrm
ecaphodius excavaticollis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Science\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  218(4574)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  806-808\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  19 November 1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical mimicry in the myrmecophilous beetl
e Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Science (Washington, D.C.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1126/science.218.4574.806\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; US
A; Florida; Mississippi; scientific; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; symbiont
; myrmecophile; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; chemica
l mimicry; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The myrmecophilus beetle Myrmecaphodius excavat
icollis (Blanchard) was found to have species-specific cuticular hydrocarbons ac
quired from one of its hosts, the ant Solenopsis richteri Forel. Removal from it
s ant host resulted in loss of the host hydrocarbons, leaving a cuticular patter
n innate to the beetle. When beetles were transferred to colonies of three other
 Solenopsis species, they acquired the specific hydrocarbons associated with eac
h of the new hosts. This passive integration mechanism is coupled with the beetl
e's armored exterior to enable it to cope with multiple aggressive hosts.  \u169
?AAAS.    (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) 
on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1354.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Vander_
Meer_and_Wojcik-1982(M-1354).pdf   or abstract  http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/co
ntent/abstract/218/4574/806 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29030\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K. and Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasite and host ant interactions: The chemical e
cology of parasite integration.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Proc. 6th annual Meeting of the Internationa
l Society of Chemical Ecology, p. 47.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Parasite and host ant interactions: The chem
ical ecology of parasite integration.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; chemistry; ecology; nestmate recognition; symb
iont; parasite; mimicry; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2308.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29024\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Wojcik, D.P. and Jouvenaz, D.P
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical differentiation of cryptic fire ant speci
es?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Proc. 5th annual Meeting of the Internationa
l Society of Chemical Ecology, p. 55.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemical differentiation of cryptic fire ant
 species?  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; Argentina; scientific;
 chemistry; venom; cuticular hydrocarbons; chemical mimicry; chromatotype; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 98; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2309.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 76179\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vanderwoude, C., Boudjelas, S., Gruber, M., Hoffm
ann, B., Oi, D. and Porter, S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2021\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biosecurity plan for invasive ants in the Pacific 
Region\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Pullaiah, T. and Ielmini, M.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Invasive alien species: Observations and issu
es from around the world\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  New York\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  John Wiley & Sons Ltd.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  2: Issues and Invasions in Asia and the Pacific R
egion\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  275-288\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  13\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biosecurity plan for invasive ants in the Pa
cific Region\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119607045.ch25\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  new, Oct 21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-88, Oct 21\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Anoplolepis gracilipes; Linepi
thema humile; Nylanderia fulva; Pheidole megacephala; Solenopsis geminata; Solen
opsis invicta; Trichomyrmex destructor; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderinae; 
Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Oceania; Pacific; review; return; plan; response; preven
tion; quarantine; behavior; high interspecific aggression; human commerce mediat
ed dispersal; impact; ecological; polygyny; sociality; sociotomy; supercoloniali
ty; symbiosis with plant pests; regional coordination; invasive ants; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The well-being of Pacific island communities an
d the ecosystems that support them is inextricably linked. Island ecosystems are
 fragile, complex, and have often evolved in isolation. Many species have not ev
olved defenses against common predators such as rats, cats, and invasive ants, a
nd the introduction of new invasive species threatens the delicate balance betwe
en island communities and the ecosystems that nourish and sustain them.  Invasiv
e ants pose an especially severe threat and impact human health, agriculture, an
d the natural environment. A best-practice integrated biosecurity system is need
ed to prevent the entry and establishment of these species as well as mitigate i
mpacts caused by priority invasive ants currently present in the region. We reco
mmend a regional approach to invasive ant biosecurity be considered, which inclu
des the essential elements of prevention, early detection, rapid response, ongoi
ng management, capacity building, outreach, and research. This system should ope
rate at island, national, and regional scales.  The strategy has six main object
ives:  Prevention (prevent the entry of invasive ants into the Pacific region an
d prevent their spread to new locations within the region).  Early detection and
 incursion response (detect and eradicate new invasive ant incursions while erad
ication is still possible and costs are low).  Management of existing species (m
itigate the impacts of priority invasive ants already present).  Public awarenes
s and engagement (increase public awareness of invasive ant impacts, enlist thei
r cooperation and support for detection and control).  Enhance capacity for inva
sive ant biosecurity and management (prevention plans, pre-approved control chem
icals, monitoring protocols, etc.).  Targeted research (develop an active resear
ch program that provides practical improvements in detection and mitigation of i
nvasive ants).  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employe
e(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 22; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  pdf available through  https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/351268052_Biosecurity_Plan_for_Invasive_Ants_in_the_Pacific_Region \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29097\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vargo, E.L. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Colony reproduction by budding in the polygyne for
m of Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  82(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  307-313\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  May 1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Colony reproduction by budding in the polygy
ne form of Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Annals of the Entomological Society of
 America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/aesa/82.3.307\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; polygyny; colony reproduction; growth; 
polydomy; migration; territory; mound; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Indirect evidence has suggested that polygyne c
olonies of the red imported fire ant, S. invicta Buren, reproduce by budding.  T
o verify directly the occurrence of budding, queens in polygyne colonies were ma
rked with fine wire and introduced to two field sites previously cleared of fire
 ant mounds.  After 4-5 mo, all mounds were mapped and collected.  Marked queens
 originating from the same colony were found distributed among three to eight di
fferent mounds separated by up to 50 m.  Marked queens from different colonies w
ere not recovered in the same mound, suggesting that queens do not move freely a
mong established mounds which lack some former connection.  The total weights of
 the colonies increased about four times during the course of the study, indicat
ing substantial growth of colonies in addition to active budding.  This article 
was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time and is 
therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-ARS-CMAVE M-2347, verified-SDP; verified-ELV.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publi
cations/Vargo_and_Porter-1993(M-2763).pdf   or pdf available through https://www
.ars.usda.gov/southeast-area/gainesville-fl/center-for-medical-agricultural-and-
veterinary-entomology/imported-fire-ant-and-household-insects-research/docs/refe
reed-publications-alphabetic/   or pdf available through  https://academic.oup.c
om/aesa/article/82/3/307/86519 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 29108\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vargo, E.L. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Reproduction by virgin queen fire ants in queenles
s colonies: comparative study of three taxa (Solenopsis richteri, hybrid S. invi
cta/richteri, S. geminata) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  40(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  283-293\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Reproduction by virgin queen fire ants in qu
eenless colonies: comparative study of three taxa (Solenopsis richteri, hybrid S
. invicta/richteri, S. geminata) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1007/BF01242364\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Myrmicinae; Solenopsis geminat
a; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis invicta x richteri hybrid
; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; Texas; scientific; pheromone; reprod
uction; virgin queen; queen control; execution; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  In the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, some winge
d virgin queens are known to shed their wings (dealate) upon removal of the mate
d mother queen. These virgin queens then develop their ovaries and begin to lay 
eggs, thereby foregoing the option of leaving on mating flights and attempting t
o found their own colonies. Such a response of virgin queens to queenlessness ha
s not been reported for other ants. In order to determine if virgin queens of so
me other fire ants (subgenus Solenopsis) would respond in the same way, experime
nts were conducted on S. richteri, hybrid S. invicta/richteri and S. geminata, a
 member of a species complex different from that of the other taxa. Just as in S
. invicta, virgin queens of S. richteri and the hybrid dealated and began to lay
 eggs within days of the removal of the queen. In addition, workers executed man
y of the reproductively active virgin queens, a phenomenon also found in S. invi
cta. In contrast, virgin queens of S. geminata did not dealate or quickly begin 
to lay eggs upon separation from the queen. Reasons for the variability in the r
esponse of virgin queens of the different species may be 1) higher probability o
f reproductive success for unmated dealated queens compared to normal claustral 
founding in S. invicta and S. richteri linked to relatively frequent loss of the
 mother queen; or 2) phylogenetic constraint.   (This article was written and pr
epared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the 
public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2763; verified-ELV.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/99de/593e3a40b45309
4d4c116c48d704887587c1.pdf   or   https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Edward_Va
rgo/publication/226724244_Reproduction_by_virgin_queen_fire_ants_in_queenless_co
lonies_Comparative_study_of_three_taxa_Solenopsis_richteri_hybridS_invictarichte
ri_S_geminata_Hymenoptera_Formicidae/links/00b49538f7d7cd2890000000/Reproduction
-by-virgin-queen-fire-ants-in-queenless-colonies-Comparative-study-of-three-taxa
-Solenopsis-richteri-hybridS-invicta-richteri-S-geminata-Hymenoptera-Formicidae.
pdf   or   http://www.springerlink.com/content/r4845p3t74w7516j/fulltext.pdf   o
r   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Vargo_and_P
orter-1993(M-2763).pdf   or pdf available through https://www.ars.usda.gov/south
east-area/gainesville-fl/center-for-medical-agricultural-and-veterinary-entomolo
gy/imported-fire-ant-and-household-insects-research/docs/refereed-publications-a
lphabetic/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32553\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vazquez, R.J. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Re-confirming host specificity of the fire ant dec
apitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) after field release in Fl
orida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  88(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  107-110\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2005\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Re-confirming host specificity of the fire a
nt decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae) after field release
 in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://dx.doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(20
05)088[0107:RHSOTF]2.0.CO;2}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 05; PDF-1, Apr 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster miamiana; Aphaen
ogaster c.f. carolinensis; Camponotus floridanus; Camponotus impressus; Crematog
aster minutissima; Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrmex bureni;
 Forelius pruinosus; Linepithema humile; Odontomachus brunneus; Pheidole dentata
; Pogonomyrmex badius; Pseudomyrmex pallidus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis in
victa; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Att
ini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; nest;
 head width; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Ps
eudacteon curvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; field release; host prefe
rence testing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Post-release monitoring confirms that the Formo
sa biotype of P. curvatus is not attracted to non-Solenopsis ants. Flies were at
tracted to the native fire ant, S. geminata, at very low rates (<5% of that with
 S. invicta) but virtually no oviposition attempts were observed. Overall result
s were consistent with laboratory predictions except attraction rates to nontarg
et fire ants in the field were much lower than in small laboratory test chambers
.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on off
icial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=3215&content=PDF   or   htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles
/Place/66151015/publications/Vazquez_and_Porter-2005(M-3999).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or
   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653/0015-4040%282005%29088%5B0107%3ARHSOTF%
5D2.0.CO%3B2   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publicat
ions/Vazquez_and_Porter-2005(M-3999).pdf   or pdf available through https://nald
c-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/catalog.xhtml?id=3215&start=0&searchText=Morrison&se
archField=&sortField= \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32551\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vazquez, R.J., Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of a biotype of the fire ant deca
pitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Dipetera: Phoridae) from Northern Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  33(5)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1436-1441\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Oct. 2004\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Host specificity of a biotype of the fire an
t decapitating fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Dipetera: Phoridae) from Northern Argen
tina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Environmental Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/0046-225X-33.5.1436\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 05; PDF-1, Sep 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis xyloni; Myrmicinae; North America; California; Florida; So
uth America; Argentina; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; P
horidae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biotype; host specificity; host range; preference
 test; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We tested the host specificity of Pseudacteon c
urvatus Borgmeier from Formosa, Argentina on North American colonies of the red 
imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren, and the native fire ants, Solenopsi
s geminata (Fabricius) and Solenopsis xyloni McCook. No-choice tests showed that
 P. curvatus hovered over and attacked all three species of fire ants. The mean 
number of pupae successfully completing development to adult flies in the trials
 was 5.03  +- 1.55 (mean +- SE) per female fly in S. invicta, 0.66 +- 0.24 per f
emale fly in S. xyloni, and 0 per female fly in S. geminata. Paired preference t
ests showed that P. curvatus preferred to hover over S. invicta instead of S. xy
loni 77 +- 3% (mean +- SE) of the time and preferred S. invicta over S. geminata
 87 +- 4% of the time. The oviposition attempts of active female P. curvatus wer
e 2.8 times higher on S. invicta than on S. xyloni and 16 times higher on S. inv
icta than on S. geminata. These results demonstrate that this new biotype of P. 
curvatus is more host specific to North American red imported fire ants than a p
revious biotype collected from black fire ants.   (This article was written and 
prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in th
e public domain.)          *[Solenopsis geminata & Solenopsis invicta collected 
in Florida.  Solenopsis xyloni collected in California.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3833.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Vazquez_et_al-2004(M-3833).pdf   or    http://ee.oxfordjournals.org
/content/ee/33/5/1436.full.pdf   or pdf available through html https://academic.
oup.com/ee/article/33/5/1436/355915 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32552\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vazquez, R.J., Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field release and establishment of the decapitatin
g fly Pseudacteon curvatus on red imported fire ants in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  51(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  207-216\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2006\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Field release and establishment of the decap
itating fly Pseudacteon curvatus on red imported fire ants in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  BioControl (Dordrecht)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10526-005-0107-6\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, July 06, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; South America; Argentina; scientific; nest; mound
; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; parasitoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon c
urvatus; Pseudacteon tricuspis; biocontrol; field release; biotype; monitoring; 
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Decapitating phorid flies in the genus Pseudact
eon are being studied as classical biological control agents of the red imported
 fire ant, Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Pseudacteon curva
tus Borgmeier (Diptera: Phoridae) is a small decapitating fly that attacks small
 fire ant workers. We released a biotype of P. curvatus from Formosa, Argentina,
 at three sites near Gainesville, FL. Field releases were conducted in the sprin
g and summer of 2003 and monitored monthly. Flies were discovered within 5 weeks
 at the spring site and then monthly thereafter. By late spring 2004, flies rele
ased at this site had expanded 1.6 km both north and south and about 0.8 km west
ward. Initially, we found no flies from the two summer 2003 releases but we were
 successful at finding them 8 months after release during spring 2004. This pape
r documents the first successful release(s) of P. curvatus on red imported fire 
ants in the United States.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gove
rnment employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 06; from-SDP; from NAL's AGRICOLA; 
from Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://naldc-legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xht
ml?id=3662&content=PDF   or   http://www.springerlink.com/content/1q7q500ut75h67
5q/fulltext.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publi
cations/Vazquez_et_al-2006(M-4095).pdf   or pdf available through http://www.ars
.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications   or pdf available through https://naldc-
legacy.nal.usda.gov/naldc/catalog.xhtml?id=3662&start=0&searchText=Morrison&sear
chField=&sortField= \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32554\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Vogt, J.T., Porter, S.D., Nordlund, D.A. and Smit
h, R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A modified rearing system for production of Pseuda
cteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae), a parasitoid of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biol. Control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  28(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  346-353\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  November 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A modified rearing system for production of 
Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae), a parasitoid of imported fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Biological Control: theory and applica
tion in pest management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/S1049-9644(03)00100-2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 03, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; rearing system; Pseudacteon curvatus; Diptera;
 Phoridae; parasitoid; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A self-contained, climate-controlled box for ex
posing fire ants to attack by Pseudacteon parasitoids was developed.  The initia
l system, which is being used to rear Pseudacteon tricuspis Borgmeier, consists 
of large (about 244 cm L x 97 cm W x 50 cm H), well-ventilated boxes ('attack bo
xes') housed in a climate-controlled room (approx. 28 \u186?C, 80% RH, 12:12 (L:
D) h).  Adult flies emerge into the boxes, which contain live host ants (Solenop
sis invicta Buren).  Host ants are confined in a series of trays within the box,
 each containing a pair of inverted cups under which the ants can hide.  The cup
s alternate up and down, inducing the ants to trail back and forth within each t
ray.  A modified system used for Pseudacteon curvatus Borgmeier consists of clos
ed boxes, through which preconditioned air is pumped to maintain high relative h
umidity.  Steam is used to generate humidity in a small, temperature- controlled
 room from which conditioned air is drawn, and infrared heating elements mounted
 above the attack box prevent condensation.  This new system maintains high rela
tive humidity (range 80-90%) crucial for activity and survival of P. curvatus.  
System performance was monitored in 4 ways: (1) environmental conditions within 
the system (RH, temperature, dew point, and light intensity); (2) production of 
P. curvatus; (3) successful development and emergence of P. curvatus; and (4) at
tack rates throughout the box.  The modified system is capable of producing >140
0 flies/day/attack box.  This system will be useful for researchers with limited
 space in which rearing and research activities are conducted simultaneously.   
(This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on officia
l time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=25
57&content=PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/public
ations/Vogt_et_al-2003(M-3889).pdf   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.
net/10113/2557 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 30437\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wetterer, J.K. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata: Distr
ibution, impact, control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  42(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1-41\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata:
 Distribution, impact, control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  www.csuchico.edu/biol/Sociobiology/sociobiologyindex
.html\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  GAL, Aug 03, PDF-1\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Wasmannia affinis; Wasmannia a
uropunctata; Wasmannia auropunctata auropunctata; Wasmannia auropunctata austral
is; Wasmannia auropunctata laevifrons; Wasmannia auropunctata nigricans; Wasmann
ia auropunctata obscura; Wasmannia auropunctata pulla; Wasmannia auropunctata ru
gosa; Wasmannia iheringi; Wasmannia lutzi; Wasmannia rochai; Wasmannia scrobifer
a; Wasmannia sigmoidea; Wasmannia sulcaticeps; Wasmannia villosa; Wasmannia will
iamsi; Myrmicinae; Africa; Cameroon; Gabon; Asia; Cook Islands; New Caledonia; T
uvalu; Wallis and Futuna Islands; Solomon Islands; Vanuatu; Europe; England; Nor
th America; Bahamas; Barbados; Belize; Bermuda; Canada; British Columbia; Manito
ba; Ontario; Quebec; Caribbean; Cocos Islands; Costa Rica; Cuba; Curacao; Domini
ca; Dominican Republic; Dutch Antilles; Haiti; Honduras; Grenada; Guadeloupe; Gu
atemala; Jamaica; La Sola; Les Saints; Marie Galante; Margarita; Martinique; Mex
ico; Mona; Nicaragua; Panama; Puerto Rico; St. Croix; St. John; St. Lucia; St. V
incent; Trinidad; USA; California; Florida; Hawaii; Virgin Islands; South Americ
a; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Colombia; Ecuador; Galapagos Islands; Guyana; Par
aguay; Uruguay; Venezuela; review; biology; polygyny; temperature; morphology; t
axonomy; identification; ecology; distribution; foraging; aggression; tending He
miptera; impact; ecological; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; quarantine; in
vasive species; exotic species; greenhouse pest; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata, ha
s been increasing in importance as an exotic pest. Here we review published and 
unpublished information on its distribution, ecology, impact, and control. Wasma
nnia auropunctata occurs throughout most of the warmer parts of the New World, f
rom subtropical Argentina to subtropical Mexico and through much of the Caribbea
n, though it is not clear whether this species in native to this entire region. 
During the past century, exotic populations of W. auropunctata have become estab
lished in numerous other places, including the Galapagos Islands, West Africa (G
abon, Cameroon, and possibly the Republic of Congo and the Democratic Republic o
f Congo), Melanesia (New Caledonia, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and possibly Tuval
u), Polynesia (Wallis and Futuna and Hawaii), the mainland US (Florida and possi
bly California), and on subtropical Atlantic islands (the Bahamas and Bermuda). 
The latitudinal range of known outdoors populations of W. auropunctata is from 3
2o40'S in Argentina to 32o20'N in Bermuda. Wasmannia auropunctata is also a gree
nhouse pest in more temperate regions, such as England and Canada. In many areas
, W. auropunctata can be a significant agricultural pest, not only stinging agri
cultural workers, but also enhancing populations of Homoptera. Homoptera cause d
amage both through sapping plants of nutrients and by increasing the occurrence 
of diseases, including viral and fungal infections. In addition, W. auropunctata
 has negative impacts on many animals, both invertebrates and vertebrates, thoug
h most reports on such impact have been anecdotal. The impacts of W. auropunctat
a populations seem to be most severe on tropical islands where it is not native,
 such as the Galapagos, New Caledonia, and the Solomon Islands. Reports of wides
pread blindness in both domestic and native mammals caused by W. auropunctata st
ings deserve serious attention. Chemical control of W. auropunctata may be possi
ble for small exotic populations spread over a few dozen hectares or less. For l
arge exotic infestations, the only hope for long-term control appears to be clas
sical biocontrol.          *[Wasmannia williamsoni misspelled Wasmannia williams
i.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW, 
verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publi
cations/Wetterer_and_Porter-2003(M-3778).pdf   or   http://www.researchgate.net/
profile/James_Wetterer/publication/43256618_The_little_fire_ant_Wasmannia_auropu
nctata_distribution_impact_and_control/links/0c9605258ada864631000000.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 30903\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wheeler, W.B., Jouvenaz, D.P., Wojcik, D.P., Bank
s, W.A., Van Middelem, C.H., Lofgren, C.S., Nesbitt, S., Williams, L. and Brown,
 R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after applic
ation of 10-5 bait for fire ant control, northeast Florida--1972-74\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pestic. Monit. J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  11\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  146-156\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after 
application of 10-5 bait for fire ant control, northeast Florida--1972-74\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pesticides Monitoring Journal\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[no ant data; data results from treatment for 
fire ants.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1651.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 37359\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wiley, S., Thompson, L., Korzukhin, M. and Porter
, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1999\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential RIFA range expansion - a GIS view\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 21-29, In: Proceedings of the 1999 Import
ed Fire Ant Conference, March 3-5, 1999, Charleston, South Carolina, 154 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Potential RIFA range expansion - a GIS view\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; distribution; expansion; invasive species; mod
el; GIS; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  GIS provides the tools to build a spatial model
 using physiographic features to predict temperature suitability for RIFA coloni
zation on a local scale. Spatial statistics techniques in a GIS framework can be
 used to incorporate heterogeneity into a landscape model. After additional rese
arch to determine the realtive importance of individual mitigating factors, this
 model could be used to refine the predictions of the dynamic model developed by
 Thompson, et al (1999). Reliable forecasting of colonization success in areas t
hreatened by RIFA infestation will allow policy makers and administrators to pla
n, fund, and implement regulatory activities. This may save millions of dollars 
in economic loses attributed to fire ants.   (This article was written and prepa
red by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pub
lic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 07; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Wiley_et_al-1999(M-3369).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or in this 
8.3 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/3/32/1999_IFA_Conference_P
roceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47477\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wiley, S., Thompson, L.C., Korzukhin, M.D. and Po
rter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A GIS representation of potential red imported fir
e ant range expansion across the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 110-114, In: J.L. Croker, K.M. Vail, & R.
M. Pereira (ed.), Proceedings of the 2000 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 5-
7, 2000, Chattanooga, Tennessee, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A GIS representation of potential red import
ed fire ant range expansion across the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Arizona; Arkansas; California; Delaware; Florida;
 Georgia; Louisiana; Maryland; Mississippi; Nevada; New Mexico; North Carolina; 
Oregon; Oklahoma; South Carolina; Tennessee; Texas; Virginia; Washington; scient
ific; colony growth; colony area; alate production; distribution; temperature; s
oil temperature; expansion; invasive species; model; GIS; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The future range of the red imported fire ant, 
Solenopsis invicta Buren, (RIFA) within the United States was predicted based on
 its current distribution. A dynamic model of colony growth with two time steps 
per day was formulated to evaluate colony area and alate production. Colony grow
th rate depends on daily max/min soil temperatures. Temperature records from 4,5
37 meteorological stations within the current (near 1.5 million km2) and potenti
al range of RIFA were obtained from NOAA data banks. At each station, a colony w
as allowed to grow and lifetime female alate production was calculated. Alate pr
oduction was then matched to the current distribution extremes in Arkansas, Tenn
essee and Oklahoma. Four zones of colony proliferation success were defined: cer
tain, possible, undemonstrated, and improbable. An annual precipitation limit wa
s selected to indicate regions where arid conditions may prohibit growth in non-
irrigated areas. Results of the model predict that RIFA will likely move 80 to15
0 km North in Oklahoma and Arkansas. They will also likely continue expanding in
to portions of Virginia, Maryland and Delaware in the East, and New Mexico, Ariz
ona, California, Oregon, Nevada and maybe even Washington in the West. Geographi
c Information Systems (GIs) software tools were used to visualize and spatially 
analyze the results of this model.   (This article was written and prepared by U
.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public doma
in.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 13.2 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/2/2a/2000_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47486\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wiley, S., Thompson, L.C., Porter, S.D. and Korzu
khin, M.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling Amdro application scenarios\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 146-114, In: J.L. Croker, K.M. Vail, & R.
M. Pereira (ed.), Proceedings of the 2000 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 5-
7, 2000, Chattanooga, Tennessee, 173 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Modeling Amdro application scenarios\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississipp
i; North Carolina; South Carolina; Texas; scientific; nest founding; brood raidi
ng; colony area growth; alate production; territorial competition; queen death; 
colony death; colony growth rate; soil temperature; invasive species; chemical c
ontrol; model; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A dynamic model was used to calculate the numbe
r of Amdro (hydramethylnon) applications per year necessary to maintain red impo
rted fire ant (Solenopsis invicba) populations under two given levels of control
: 90% and 60% (keeping total colony coverage below 10% and 40%, respectively). T
he model was applied to data from 437 weather stations within the fire ant's cur
rent range in the southern U.S. This dynamic fire ant population model was formu
lated to describe major aspects of colony life history, including nest founding,
 brood raiding, colony area growth, alate production, territorial competition wi
th neighbors, queen death and colony death. Colony growth rate depends on daily 
max/min soil temperatures. The rate of queen influx was determined by the model 
and a 32x32 m plot was populated with emigrating female alates from surrounding 
territories. The population on the plot was allowed to grow until the critical t
hreshold of 10% or 40% of the area was infested. Amdro bait was then applied and
 colonies were eliminated using a mortality function that increased linearly fro
m 0.8 for small colonies to 0.95 for large colonies. To maintain 90% of the area
 without fire ants, model results indicate that the number of applications per y
ear ranged from four in southern Florida and Texas, to two on the northern limit
s of the ant's range. To maintain 60% control the number of applications was red
uced to two over much of the lower South and one in the upper South. Boundaries 
for application areas were delineated using spatial analysis procedures within G
eographic Information Systems (GIS) software. Maps were then generated to simpli
fy representation of results. Future research will address timing of application
 intervals.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee
(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 13.2 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/2/2a/2000_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32555\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F., Oi, D.H., Porter, S.D., Pereira, 
R.M. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of imported fire ants (Hymenopt
era: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Am. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  49(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  144-155\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of imported fire ants (Hy
menoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  American Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ae/49.3.150\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; review; biocontrol; biological contro
l agents; natural enemies; biopesticides; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This paper reviews the current status of biolog
ical pesticides and self-sustaining biological control agents for use against fi
re ants (Solenopsis invicta and S. richteri). This paper also discusses some bio
logical control organisms that have been or are currently under study, including
 parasites (parasitic ants, mites and phorid flies), pathogens (microsporidia, f
ungi, nematodes, bacteria and viruses), predators and competitors.    (This arti
cle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, an
d is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 05; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-SDP; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.9 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Williams_et_al-2003(M-3824).pdf   or  2 MB pdf available thr
ough  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/224497572_Biological_Control_of_I
mported_Fire_Ants_Hymenoptera_Formicidae   or 21.2 MB pdf available through  htt
ps://academic.oup.com/ae/article/49/3/150/2474722 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31195\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Science\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  264(5166)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  1653\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant control\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Science (Washington, D.C.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Aug 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; scientific; chemical control; biocont
rol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2847.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Letter to editor in response to article b
y C.C. Mann, 1994, Science 263: 1560-1561.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/William
s_and_Porter-1994(M-2847).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38298\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on USDA-ARS biological control studies on f
ire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 143-144, In: Proceedings of the 1996 Impo
rted Fire Ant Research Conference, April 16-18, 1996, New Orleans, Louisiana, 15
8 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on USDA-ARS biological control studie
s on fire ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; Microspo
ridi; Thelohania solenopsae; Hymenoptera; parasitic ant; Solenopsis daguerrei; S
olenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Diptera; Phoridae; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The Red Imported Fire Ant, Solenopsis invicta, 
is a major urban and agricultural pest throughout the entire southeastern United
 States. This species is one of the most abundant insect pests in North America 
with average densities of 20-30 mounds/acre and 100-200 ants/ft2. High densities
 of this pest in the United States appear to be at least partially the result of
 biological release from natural enemies in South America where fire ant populat
ions are usually 1/5 of what they are in the United States. Natural biological c
ontrol agents are almost entirely absent in the United States. We feel that the 
introduction of natural enemies from South America could sufficiently shift the 
biological balance in the United States so that our native ants could compete wi
th this imported pest which could reduce populations here to levels similar to t
hose found in South America.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Williams_and_Porter-1996(M-3017).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or 
in this 9.7 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/4/4c/1996_IFA_Confe
rence_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38823\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F., Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of fire ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 129, In:  D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceedin
gs of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gainesv
ille, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control of fire ants.  [abstract]
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, March 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis g
eminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; South Amer
ica; Argentina; scientific; ecology; population ecology; habitats; community eco
logy; symbiont; myrmecophile; Thelohania solenopsae; Solenopsis (Labauchena) dag
uerrei; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control research on fire ants in the
 USDA-ARS involves 3 highly specific naturalenemies that will stress imported fi
re ant populations sufficiently to allow native ants to bettercompete. These are
, (1) Thelohania solenopsae, a microsporidian that kills a high percentageof inf
ected IFA colonies, (2) Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei, a parasitic ant that 
attaches to the IFA queen and redirects IFA workers to tend the brood of the par
asite, and (3)Pseudacteon spp., phorid flies that are strong antagonists and par
asites of IFA Laboratory studies in Argentina with Thelohania solenopsae showed 
that healthy colonies lived longer than infected ones. After 12 weeks of artific
ial rearing, 50% of the healthy colonies died versus 93% of the infected ones. I
n field studies in Argentina, the size of infected colonies was smaller than non
infected ones and the overall density of the infected populations declined by mo
re than 80%.  The presence of Solenopsis daguerrei in fire ant colonies has detr
imental effects on colony growth and the proportion of sexual reproductives prod
uced in the colony. S. daguerrei queens enter fire ant colonies and attach thems
elves to the mother queen. Previous studies have demonstrated that this parasite
 inhibits the fire ant mother queen and her egg production, thus causing the ant
 colony to collapse and eventually die out. Since S. daguerrei queens attach the
mselves to fire ant queens, this species could be especially useful in controlli
ng the  multiple-queen form of the fire ant.  At least 18 species of Pseudacteon
 flies have been found attacking fire ants in South America. Different species a
ttack different sizes of fire ants. These flies are common and active throughout
 most of the year, but different species are more active at different times of t
he day. Most species appear to be broadly distributed across a wide range of hab
itats and climates. The Pseudacteon species that attack fire ants appear to be s
pecific to fire ants. The host specificity of several parasitic Pseudacteon flie
s in South America was tested in the field with 23 species of ants from 13 gener
a. As expected, these flies were attracted only to Solenopsis fire ants.   (This
 article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official tim
e, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/15923   or in this 8.2 M
B file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Conference_Proceed
ings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40893\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F., Porter, S.D. and Briano, J.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant biological control studies in the U.S. wi
th Thelohania solenopsae and Solenopsis daguerrei.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 70-71, In:  D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceed
ings of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gaine
sville, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant biological control studies in the U
.S. with Thelohania solenopsae and Solenopsis daguerrei.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponot
us floridanus; Dorymyrmex bureni; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Solen
opsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae
; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida; Mississippi; Texa
s; South America; Argentina; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; biological control 
agents; Thelohania solenopsae; microsporidiosis; entomopathogenic protozoa; path
ogenicity; natural enemies; parasites; parasitism; Solenopsis daguerrei; invasiv
e species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The microsporidium, Thelohania solenopsae, (Mic
rosporida: Thelohaniidae) an obligate intracellular pathogen was discovered by A
llen and Buren in 1974 in alcohol-preserved specimens of Solenopsis invicta coll
ected in Mato Grosso, Brazil, in 1973. It was also found infecting colonies of t
he black imported fire ant, Solenopsis richteri, in Argentina and is one of the 
most common pathogens in fire ants in Brazil and Argentina. In 1996, during a su
rvey for pathogens in polygyne field-collected colonies in the U.S., we discover
ed a microsporidium in workers of S. invicta found along a roadside (US 441) by 
Payne's Prairie 8 km south of Gainesville, Florida. This microsporidian species 
isolated from S. invicta in Florida was determined to be dimorphic with features
 similar to those described for T. solenopsae. In addition to the morphological 
data, the sequence of the 16s rRNA gene of the Florida microsporidium was determ
ined. Sequence comparisons of the 16s rRNA genes of T. solenopsae and the micros
poridium found in S. invicta populations in Florida were almost identical. There
fore, as indicated by this species diagnostics, we have the first evidence of T.
 solenopsae infection in S. invicta in the U.S.  Following this discovery, a tot
al of 379 colonies was excavated in north central Florida and 86 (23 %) of these
 were infected. We also examined polygynous colonies from several other sites in
 the southern U.S. and found additional infections at Hurley, MS, the site from 
which polygynous colonies were first reported in the U.S., Gulfport, MS and Thor
ndale, TX. In addition, other ant species were also examined: S. geminata, Dorym
yrmex bureni, Pheidole metallescens, Pheidole moerens, Camponotus jloridanus, Tr
achymynnex septentrionalis, and Brachymyrmex depilis; all were negative for the 
microsporidium. Previously, we found only polygynous S. invicta colonies to be i
nfected with T. solenopsae, however, we recently found a monogyne colony site in
 Florida with the infection. Also, we have surveyed much fewer monogyne sites th
an polygyne areas. The detrimental effects of this pathogen on S. invicta field 
colonies in the U.S. are not known at present but of the original 30 field-colle
cted colonies that were infected and returned to the laboratory, all were comple
tely without brood and had only a few workers and queens remaining after 12 mont
hs. This is in contrast to healthy field-collected colonies that have not only s
urvived in our laboratory for several years without loss of brood but have incre
ased in size. We also found T. solenopsae infected colonies from newly-mated que
ens that we had collected in 1994 around Gainesville, FL. These colonies were be
ing maintained in our laboratory and were the oldest S. invicta colonies we had 
in the lab rearing rooms. The infected colonies where in very poor condition and
 most of them contained the large binucleated spores of T, solenopsae. Some of t
he other data that we have obtained on T. solenopsae in the U.S. is the percent 
of infection rates of queens (31 %), workers (72%), larvae (54 %) and colonies (
23 %). Finally, queens in infected colonies weighed 50% less than queens in noni
nfected colonies.  The presence of the parasitic ant, Solenopsis daguerrei, in f
ire ant colonies has detrimental effects on colony growth and the proportion of 
sexual reproductives produced in the colony. S. daguerrei queens enter fire ant 
colonies and attach themselves to the mother queen. Previous studies have demons
trated that this parasite inhibits the fire ant mother queen and her egg product
ion, thus causing the ant colony to collapse and eventually die out.   (This art
icle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, a
nd is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Williams_et_al-1997(M-3295).pdf   or pdf available through http://w
ww.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=16173   or in this 8.2 MB file http://ww
w.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Thesis\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31589\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchar
d) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their relationsh
ips to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b University:}{\f1\fs28  Ph.D. dissert., University of Florida, 74 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Bl
anchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) and their rela
tionships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississ
ippi; scientific; diet; symbiont; myrmecophile; symphile; strigilation; predator
; scavenger; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; M
yrmecaphodius excavaticollis; feeding relationship; feces; flight period; ovaria
n development; reproductive period; biocontrol; blacklight traps; pitfall traps;
 radioisotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  [Dissert. Abstr. Int. B 36: 5962]  [Order
 # DAH76-12150]\par }
{\f1\fs28 M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983
, Batesiana  et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae
: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.\par }
{\f1\fs28 PUBLISHED as: Wojcik & Habeck, 1977, Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Breeding 
period and ovariole number in Myrmecaphodius  excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Eup
aria castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae), Coleopt. Bull. 31: 335-338.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Wojcik et al., 1978, Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Flight periods of Myrmeca
phodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Sc
arabaeidae), Coleopt. Bull. 32: 59-64.\par }
{\f1\fs28 Wojcik et al., 1991, Fire ant myrmecophiles: Feeding relationships of 
Martinezia dutertrei and Euparia castanea (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) with their 
ants hosts, Solenopsis  spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), Insect. Soc. 38: 273-281
.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  }{\f1\fs28\b If available [see instructions #12: DOI
's and PDF's]}{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31596\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1980\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: behavior of Myrmecosaurus 
ferrugineus Bruch (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae) with comments on its abundance\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  5\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  63-68\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: behavior of Myrmecos
aurus ferrugineus Bruch (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae) with comments on its abundan
ce\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; scienti
fic; distribution; population; behavior; trophallaxis; grooming; symbiont; myrme
cophile; Coleoptera; Staphylinidae; Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Grooming behavior of Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus 
Bruch is described. The beetle is fed by trophallaxis from the epipharynx of wor
ker red imported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren. Predation on any ant caste
 by the staphylinid was not observed. Examination of all collection records indi
cate that this staphylinid is widespread but uncommon. The low abundance and lac
k of predatory behavior in this beetle precludes its use in a biological program
 for fire ants.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government empl
oyee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1201.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik-
1980(M-1201).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31598\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1983\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of the ecology of Red Imported Fire Ant
s in North and South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  66(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  101-111\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1983\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comparison of the ecology of Red Imported Fi
re Ants in North and South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.2307/3494556\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Conomyrma; Paratrechina fulva;
 Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Dolichoderinae; Form
icinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; California; Florida; 
Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; Puerto Rico; South Carolina; Te
xas; South America; Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Mato Grosso; Paraguay; scientifi
c; mating; flight; season; temperature; rainfall; community structure; habitat; 
cerrado; pantanal; floating; distribution; population; mound; dispersal; bait; c
hemical control; quarantine; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/60360510/publi
cations/Wojcik-1983(M-1375).pdf   or   https://pubag.nal.usda.gov/download/23149
/pdf   or   https://journals.flvc.org/flaent/article/view/57788/55467   or pdf a
vialable through https://journals.flvc.org/flaent/article/view/57788 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31599\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bibliography of imported fire ants and their contr
ol: Second Supplement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  69\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  394-415\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bibliography of imported fire ants and their
 control: Second Supplement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; 
chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavio
r; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; impact; agricultural; m
edical; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[The literature search for this bibliography w
as completed in October 1985.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1564.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.6 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66
151015/publications/Wojcik-1986(M-1564).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flae
nt/article/view/58158/55837   or 1.9 MB  http://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF/00/0
9/88/13/00085/SN00154040_0069_00216.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31601\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on the biology and ecology of fire an
ts in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Lofgren, C.S. and Vander Meer, R.K.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ants and leaf cutting ants: Biology and 
management\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder, CO.  435 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  88-103\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  8\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Observations on the biology and ecology of f
ire ants in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; scientific; prey; diet; colony size; colony longevity; mating; 
flight; population; distribution; mound; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; Micro
sporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia; nematode;
 parasite; Diplopoda; millipede; predator; scavenger; Acarina; Diplopoda; millip
ede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Pselaphidae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylin
idae; Tenebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Diap
riidae; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Lepidoptera; Strepsipter
a; Thysanura; tending Hemiptera; extrafloral nectaries; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  S. invicta builds mounds in Brazil equal in siz
e to the large mounds built in the United States, provide similar soil types are
 compared.  The numbers of ants in colonies in Brazil are at least equal to the 
numbers found in colonies in the United States.  Thenumbers of alates in mounds 
in Brazil are similar to numbers in the U.S.  The importance of the differences 
between Brazilian & North American population concerning the time of day of mati
ng flights has not been established.  S. invicta is not common in termite mounds
 in Mato Grosso.  S. invicta feeds on arthropods, carrion, garbage, meat and hon
ey baits, and extrafloral nectaries, and tend aphids as they do in the U.S.  Col
ony densities in Brazil can be similar to those in the U.S. where similar habita
ts are considered.  The presence of pathogens and/or inquilines is one of the ma
ny factors influencing S. invicta populations in Brazil.  S. invicta colonies in
 Brazil probably have a life span equal to the life span of colonies in the U.S.
   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offi
cial time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1574.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or 1.2 MB  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/W
ojcik-1986(M-1574).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47168\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Status of the Search for Natural Control Agents in
 South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 29-37, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler], Pro
ceedings of the 1986 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 3-4, 1986, Austin, Texa
s, 107 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Status of the Search for Natural Control Age
nts in South America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1986_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; distribution; nest; mound; behavior; symbio
nt; myrmecophile; predator; parasite; pathogen; virus; fungus; microsporidan; ne
ogregarine; nematode; parasite; scavenger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; His
teridae; Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitid
ae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Brief accounts are given of the known pathogens
, parasites, and predators of the fire ants in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  The pathoge
ns include two microsporidians, one neogregarine, and one nematode.  Phorid flie
s, eucharaitid wasps, parasitic ants, predaceous scarab beetles, hister beetles,
 chrysomelid beetle larvae, thysanura, and millipedes have been collected from f
ire ant nests in Brazil.  Their potential for use in a biological control progra
m for fire ants in the U.S. is discussed.   (This article was written and prepar
ed by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the publ
ic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3.8 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/f/fa/1986_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31605\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  USDA Fire Ant Program: Ecology, Radioisotope studi
es, and survey of biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  1986 IAEA-FAO Short Course on the Use of Rad
ioisotopes in Insect Control.  Sponsored by Department of Entomology & Nematolog
y, University of Florida and the USDA, ARS, Gainesville, FL, p. 314-326.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  USDA Fire Ant Program: Ecology, Radioisotope
 studies, and survey of biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; r
eview; ecology; population; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Mic
rosporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia geminata
; nematode; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; parasite; predator; scavenger; Diplo
poda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Euparia ca
stanea; Martinezia dutertrei; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenopte
ra; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2417.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik-
1986(M-2417).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 41322\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1988\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Survey of biological control agents in Brazil - a 
final report, with comments on preliminary research in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 50-61, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler & ed.
], Proceedings of the 1988 imported fire ant conference, May 4-5, 1988, Athens, 
Georgia, 175 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Survey of biological control agents in Brazi
l - a final report, with comments on preliminary research in Argentina\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1988_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Solenopsis quicquecuspis; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazi
l; scientific; polygyny; nest; mound; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; parasite
; pathogen; virus; fungus; microsporidan; neogregarine; nematode; parasite; scav
enger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Pselaphidae;
 Scarabaeidae; Staphylinidae; Tenebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygae
idae; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsis (Labauchena); L
epidoptera; Thysanura; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 09; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 5.1 MB file  http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/6/68/1988_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31606\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral interactions between ants and their par
asites\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  72(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  43-51\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1989\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral interactions between ants and the
ir parasites\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta cephalotes; Bothriomyrmex
 decapitans; Camponotus; Eciton dulcius crassinode; Iridomyrmex cordatus; Lasius
 alienus; Lasius mixtus; Lasius niger; Lasius reginae; Pheidole dentata; Pheidol
e fervida; Pheidologeton; Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis (Labauchena) daguerrei; Solen
opsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Tapinoma; Dolichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formic
inae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; Asia; Europe; North Ameri
ca; South America; review; biology; ecology; behavior; parasite; ectoparasite; e
ndoparasite; Acarina; Antennophoridae; Antennophorus uhlmanni; Macrochelidae; Ma
crocheles rettenmeyeri; Uropodidae; Cillibano comato; Diptera; Phoridae; Apoceph
alus aridus; Apodicrania termitophila; Hymenoptera; Aphidiidae; Aclitus sappaphi
s; Paralypis eikoae; Diapriidae; Plagiopria passerai; Plagiolepis pygmaea; Solen
opsia imitatrix; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Schizaspidia tenuicornis; Strepsiptera; 
Myrmecolacidae; tending Hemiptera; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Ectoparasitic and endoparasitic arthropods of a
nts include species of Acarina (Antennophoridae, Macrochelidae, Uropodidae), Str
epsiptera, Myrmecolacidae, Hymenoptera (Diapriidae, Eucharitidae, Formicidae), a
nd Diptera (Phoridae).  Variation in the style of ectoparasitism is illustrated 
by the different lifestages involved and differing effects on the hosts by paras
itic ants and eucharitids.  Considerable variation in behavior occurs between re
lated genera and species of phorids emphasizing the danger of over-generalizatio
n on the relationships of ants and their parasites.   (This article was written 
and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore i
n the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography; from-DPW, verif
ied-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2099.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  1.3 MB  http://cache.ucr.edu/~heraty/literature%20co
py/Wojcik1989.PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/pub
lications/Wojcik-1989(M-2099).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article
/view/58451/56130   or   https://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=2315
9&content=PDF   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/issue/v
iew/2798   or pdf available through http://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view
/58451 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31607\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1990\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral interactions of fire ants and their par
asites, predators and inquilines\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Vander Meer, R.K., Jaffe, K. and Cedeno, A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Applied myrmecology: a world perspective\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder, CO.  741 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  329-344\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Chapter:}{\f1\fs28  31\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Behavioral interactions of fire ants and the
ir parasites, predators and inquilines\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Atta; Solenopsis (Labauchena) 
daguerrei; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenop
sis xyloni; Dorylinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Asia; Ceylon; North America; South Am
erica; review; biology; ecology; behavior; strigilation; symbiont; myrmecophile;
 inquiline; phoresy; parasite; predator; Acarina; Tarsonemidae; Uropodidae; Opli
tis exopodi; Oplitis virgilinus; Diplopoda; millipede; Calyptodesmus sanctus; Ca
lyptodesmus schubarti; Blattaria; Atticolidae; Coleoptera; Anthicidae; Carabidae
; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Melandryidae; Pselaphidae; Ctenisis fasciculata; Eu
rhexius putzeysi; Fustiger elegans; Metopioxys gallardoi; Pselaphomorphus bruchi
; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; Myrmecaphodius excavatic
ollis; Myrmecaphodius proseni; Rhyssemus neglectus; Scydmaenidae; Staphylinidae;
 Dinardopsis; Dinusella; Euthorax; Myrmecosaurus ferrugineus; Oxypoda; Pella; Te
nebrionidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Apodicrania termitophila; Commoptera solenopsidi
s; Pseudacteon crawfordii; Pseudacteon obtusus; Pseudacteon spatulatus; Syrphida
e; Hemiptera; Cydnidae; Lygaeidae; Neoblissus parasitaster; Reduviidae; Acanthas
pis concinnula; Tingidae; Vianaidinae; Anommatocoris coleopteratus; Homoptera; C
ixiidae; Hymenoptera; Bethylidae; Ceraphronidae; Diapriidae; Eucharitidae; Orase
ma aenea; Orasema crassa; Orasema rapo; Ichneumonidae; Lepidoptera; Lycaenidae; 
Riodininae; Eurybia elvina; Hameris epulus signatus; Orthoptera; Gryllidae; Myrm
ecophilidae; Myrmecophilia nebrascensis; Myrmecophilia pergandei; cricket; Strep
siptera; Myrmecolacidae; Thysanura; Nicoletiidae; Grassiella praestans; Mirolepi
sma; Prolepismina; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Calyptodesmus sanctus = Calyptodesmus schubar
ti, Martinezia dutertrei = Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 Part of the Leaf-Cutting Ant Bibliography; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M
-2393.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or 1 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojc
ik-1990(M-2393).pdf   or 4 MB  http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~heraty/literature%20c
opy/Wojcik1990.PDF   or 1 MB http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015
/publications/Wojcik-1990(M-2393).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31610\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Urban pest control annotated bibliography: III - P
est ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Pi Chi Omega, National Pest Control Fraterni
ty, Bowling Green, OH, 17 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Urban pest control annotated bibliography: I
II - Pest ants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Acanthomyops; Atta texana; Cam
ponotus; Conomyrma; Crematogaster; Dorymyrmex; Formica; Iridomyrmex humilis; Lin
epithema humile; Lasius; Liometopum occidentale; Monomorium minimum; Monomorium 
pharaonis; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheidole; Pogonomyrmex; Prenolepis imparis;
 Pseudomyrmex; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis molesta; Sole
nopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tapinoma sessile; T
echnomyrmex albipes; Tetramorium caespitum; Wasmannia auropunctata; Dolichoderin
ae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; 
Canada; USA; Hawaii; review; bibliography; biology; taxonomy; identification; ec
ology; distribution; behavior; impact; medical; urban; chemical control; chemica
l control; reinfestation; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[literature review through April 1991.  Refere
nces placed in reference texts, general references (monographs & reviews; curren
t literature), argentine ants, carpenter ants, fire ants, pharaoh ant, Hawaii, o
ther ants, audio-visual materials.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 Part of the Leaf-Cutting ant bibliography; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M
-2585.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik-
1992(M-2585).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47267\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on mating flight studies, 1991-1992.  [abst
ract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 120-123, In: C.S. Lofgren [compiler], Pro
ceedings of the 1992 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 20-24, 1992, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico, 140 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on mating flight studies, 1991-1992. 
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1992_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; females; males; mating; flights; sex 
ratio; flight trap; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4.1 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/4/4b/1992_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47268\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effects on non-target ants of pre- and post-ma
ting flight toxicant applications for fire control.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 124-136, In: C.S. Lofgren [compiler], Pro
ceedings of the 1992 Imported Fire Ant Conference, April 20-24, 1992, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico, 140 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The effects on non-target ants of pre- and p
ost-mating flight toxicant applications for fire control.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1992_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaen
ogaster nr. rudis; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus floridanus; Cardiocondyla em
eryi; Conomyrma bureni; Crematogaster clara; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Hypoponera opa
ciceps; Odontomachus brunneuss; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina vividula;
 Pheidole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pr
enolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex brunneus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta
; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); Strumigenys louisianae; Tetramorium simillimum; Tr
achymyrmex septentrionalis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Pone
rinae; Pseudomyrmecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; mounds; specie
s occurrence; chemical control; pitfall traps; native species; invasive species;
 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 4.1 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/4/4b/1992_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47270\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The Gainesville transect: Twenty-one years of RIFA
 population increases\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 6-20, In: J.P. Ellis [compiler], Proceedi
ngs of the 1993 Imported Fire Ant Conference, June 15-18, 1993, Charleston, Sout
h Carolina, 141 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The Gainesville transect: Twenty-one years o
f RIFA population increases\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1993_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; distribution; abundance; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik-1993(M-2792).pdf   or in this 3.6 MB file http://www.extensi
on.org/mediawiki/files/7/74/1993_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31611\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1994\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of the red imported fire ant on native ant 
species in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Williams, D.F.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Exotic ants. Biology, impact, and control of 
introduced species\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Boulder.  xvii + 332 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Westview Press\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  269-281\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of the red imported fire ant on nativ
e ant species in Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaen
ogaster flemingi; Aphaenogaster floridana; Aphaenogaster fulva; Aphaenogaster nr
. rudis; Brachymyrmex depilis; Camponotus decipiens; Camponotus floridanus; Camp
onotus socius; Cardiocondyla ectopia; Cardiocondyla emeryi; Cardiocondyla nuda; 
Cardiocondyla venustula; Cardiocondyla wroughtoni; Conomyrma bureni; Conomyrma m
edeis; Crematogaster ashmeadi; Crematogaster atkinsoni; Crematogaster lineolata;
 Crematogaster pilosa; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Forelius pruinosus; Formica archbold
i; Formica pallidefulva; Hypoponera opaciceps; Lasius alienus; Leptothorax perga
ndei; Monomorium viridum; Odontomachus brunneus; Paratrechina bourbonica; Paratr
echina concinna; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Paratrechin
a parvula; Paratrechina vividula; Pheidole carrolli; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole 
floridana; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole v
inelandica; Prenolepis imparis; Pseudomyrmex ejectus; Solenopsis geminata; Solen
opsis invicta; Solenopsis globularia littoralis; Solenopsis picta; Solenopsis (D
iplorhoptrum); Solenopsis nr. truncorum; Tetramorium bicarinatum; Tetramorium la
nuginosum; Tetramorium simillimum; Trachymyrmex septentrionalis; Trichoscapa mem
branifera; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrm
ecinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; ecology; distribution; 
population; community; interspecific interactions; diversity; foraging; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2838; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik-
1994(M-2838).pdf   or   http://www.usmarc.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/p
ublications/Wojcik-1994(M-2838).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40880\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of fire ant invasion on other ants.  [abst
ract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 130, In:  D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceedin
gs of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gainesv
ille, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Effects of fire ant invasion on other ants. 
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-20, Apr 10\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis g
eminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific
; ecology; population density; community ecology; impact; ecological; invasive s
pecies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Ants were sampled periodically from March 1972 
to September 1992 on roadside stations using hamburger and honey baits. During 6
8 sampling periods over 21 years, 13,600 bait samples and 990,079 specimens were
 collected and identified, representing 55 species in 22 genera in 5 subfamilies
. More than one ant species was collected on approximately 33% of the baits; 16%
 of the baits were blank. Red Imported Fire Ants (Solenopsis invicta), S. gemina
ta and Pheidole dentata were the 3 major species collected on the transect over 
the years in total occurrences (58.33%) and specimens (82.5%).  The RlFA populat
ion has gradually increased until in September 1992 it dominated the ant fauna: 
43.3% of the sample occurrences (maximum 55.8% in March 1990 & April 1992), 63.1
 % of the sample specimens (maximum 74.3% in April 1992), and 50 sites (maximum 
59  sites in April 1991). The increase occurred in spite of high populations of 
S. geminata and P. dentata, two species which are predaceous on newly-mated RIFA
 queens. RlFA is an r-strategist or weed species with great reinfestation abilit
ies, enabling it to invade, establish, and rebuild populations quickly.  Once es
tablished, it persists and dominates its habitat, becoming a keystone species an
d influencing community structure.  Both S. geminata and P. dentata showed signi
ficant negative correlations (P<0.01) when compared to RlFA in percent occurrenc
es, in specimens, and in number of sites occupied. S. geminata is able to overco
me moderate disturbance, and persist and flourish in the presence of the RlFA in
vasion. S. geminata populations can return to pre-disturbance levels if they are
 not displaced by competitors.  Respite having an alarm-recruitment defense syst
em specific to Solenopsis species ants, P. dentata has decreased wherever it has
 been studied following RlFA invasion. This decrease is at least partially attri
butable to the superior recruitment and displacement abilities of RlFA over P. d
entata.  An additional 13 species occurred often enough to allow calculation of 
significant correlations against occurrences. These species can be divided into 
native ants and introduced ants. Each group had species which were either negati
vely or positively correlated with the ranked percent occurrences of RIFA.   (Th
is article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official t
ime, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://hdl.handle.net/10113/20822   }{\f1\fs28 
or in this 8.2 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Co
nference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40890\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Allen, C., Forys, E. and Brenner, R
.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution of imported fire ants in the Florida 
Keys.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 131, In:  D.P. Wojcik, (Comp.), Proceedin
gs of the 1997 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 14-16, 1997, Gainesv
ille, Florida, 136 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Distribution of imported fire ants in the Fl
orida Keys.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, March 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Solenopsis g
eminata; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific
; ecology; community ecology; population ecology; habitats; invasive species; ec
ological invasion; endangered species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The Florida keys represent an unique tropical h
abitat in the United States and are home to a variety of endangered wildlife. Re
d imported fire ants have only been reported from a few locations in the Keys, m
ainly in highly disturbed areas such as parking lots or road sides. As part of a
 larger study on the effects of imported fire ants of endangered wildlife, we re
alized that it was necessary to determine the true distribution of the ants in t
he keys as well as their presence in various habitats.  Keys and habitats were s
elected for sampling based on several criteria. Primarily, habitats in protected
 wildlife or conservation areas inhabited by endangered species (sea turtle nest
ing sites, Key deer, Salt Marsh rabbits, Stock lsland tree snail, Key Largo wood
 rat) were included. Secondly, habitats which were being considered for the rein
troduction of endangered species, such as the Stock lsland tree snail were inclu
ded. Ants were sampled primarily with terrestrial baits. A 314-inch diameter gro
und meat-ball and a 1-inch honeysoaked cotton wick were placed separately on the
 ground on 1-inch square heavy aluminumfoil. The two baits were placed 8-12 inch
es apart at each sampling site. Arboreal baits consisting of a meatball or honey
-wick (in separate plastic cups) were placed in bushes or trees 3-7 feet of the 
ground. Arboreal baits were only used in potential snail habitats or in mangrove
s with mosquito ditches. Test-tube pitfalls containing propylene glycol were use
d in snail habitat. When arboreal baits or pitfalls were used, they were placed 
at the same  relative locations as the terrestrial baits.  Over 3,000 samples fr
om 120+ locations were collected and processed. Sampling with baits  (terrestria
l or arboreal) and pitfall traps demonstrate that fire ants have penetrated some
 undisturbed areas. Berm (sea turtle nesting sites), transition-zone (Salt Marsh
 rabbits), and hammocks and pine woods (Key deer, Key Largo wood rat) were found
 to be infested on several keys. Three sites being considered for the reintroduc
tion of the endangered Stock Islanct tree snail, Stock lsland Botanical Park, Li
ttle Hammaca City Park on Key West, and Nature Conservancy property on Little To
rch Key were all found to harbor RIFA.  The information obtained in the Keys wil
l be used by our cooperators in selecting habitats for the re-establishment of t
he endangered Stock lsland tree snail in protected habitats. The presence of RlF
A in some of these habitats complicates the reintroduction process and may requi
re the judicious use of chemical treatment for RlFA control.   (This article was
 written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is th
erefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/15924   or in this 8.2 M
B file http://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/5/5f/1997_IFA_Conference_Proceed
ings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47367\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Allen, C.R.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on fire ants, sea turtles, and alligators. 
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 57-58, In: Proceedings of the 1996 Import
ed Fire Ant Research Conference, April 16-18, 1996, New Orleans, Louisiana, 158 
p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Update on fire ants, sea turtles, and alliga
tors.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; ecological; wildlife; green s
ea turtle; loggerhead sea turtle; turtle nests; alligator; alligator nests; enda
ngered species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Red Imported Fire Ants, Solenopsis invicta Bure
n, are reported in green and loggerhead sea turtle nests in the Florida Keys.  P
reliminary tests conducted with non-viable eggs indicated the RIFA could not bre
ach intact eggs. The presence of RIFA in alligator nests in Florida was confirme
d & we initiated tests to determine predation on hatchlings.  Laboratory tests i
ndicate that RIFA do not invade unbreached eggs.  Alligator eggs, hatching under
 laboratory conditions in RIFA mounds, do suffer mortality and experience static
ally significant reduction in growth.   (This article was written and prepared b
y U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public d
omain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 9.7 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/4/4c/1996_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31614\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Allen, C.R., Brenner, R.J., Forys, 
E.A., Jouvenaz, D.P. and Lutz, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants: impact on biodiversity\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Am. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  47(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  16-23\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  January 2001\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ants: impact on biodiversi
ty\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  American Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/ae/47.1.16\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; review; infestation; introduced species; biodiversity; imp
act; ecological; mammals; birds; invertebrates; invasive species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  This paper reviews the research on the actual a
nd suspected impacts of red imported fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) on the biodi
versity of endangered vertebrates and invertebrates and their habitats.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  2.7 MB  http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewconten
t.cgi?article=1046&context=ncfwrustaff   or 5.6 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2Us
erFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_et_al-2000(M-3582).pdf   or 0.8 MB pd
f available through  https://academic.oup.com/ae/article/47/1/16/6441 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31590\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A. and Buren, W.F.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report of Pheidole moerens in Florida (Hymen
optera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  U.S. Dep. Agric. Coop. Econ. Insect Rep.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  25\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  906\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: Dec. 1975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report of Pheidole moerens in Florida 
(Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  United States Department of Agricultur
e Cooperative Economic Insect Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole m
oerens; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; sc
ientific; taxonomy; key; distribution; bait; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[characters are given to distinguish P. moeren
s from P. floridana.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1037; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
et_al-1975(M-1037).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31595\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A. and Habeck, D.H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1978\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Flight periods of Myrmecap
hodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Sca
rabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleop. Bull.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  32(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  59-64\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1978\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Flight periods of My
rmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleopter
a: Scarabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleopterists Bulletin\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; scientific; behavio
r; symbiont; myrmecophile; predator; Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea;
 Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Flight periods of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis
 (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville in Florida were determined by using b
lacklight traps. E. castanea was collected from February through October; but th
e main flight period extended from May through September. The peak flight period
 of M. excavaticollis occurred in June and July with almost continuous flights f
rom May until October, and additional flights occurred in warm periods during th
e winter. No correlation was found between flight periods, air or soil temperatu
res, or rainfall. Also, no correlation was apparent between beetle flights and t
he mating flights of the host ants.   (This article was written and prepared by 
U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public dom
ain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F
., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarab
aeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.
]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1134.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of Wojcik, 1975, Biology of Myrmecap
hodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Sca
rabaeidae) and their relationships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae),
 Ph.D. dissert., University of Florida, 74 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
et_al-1978(M-1134).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31587\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A., Hicks, D.M. and Plumle
y, J.K.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1972\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A simple inexpensive pitfall trap for collecting a
rthropods\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  55\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  115-116\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A simple inexpensive pitfall trap for collec
ting arthropods\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; Georgia; scientific; methods; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  *[Lots of ants collected in traps.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Biblio Fourmis Database; from
 Fire Ant Literature Database; verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-790.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_et_al-1972(M-0790).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaen
t/article/view/56707/54386 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31594\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A., Hicks, D.M. and Summer
lin, J.W.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: new hosts and distribution
 of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Col
eoptera: Scarabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleop. Bull.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  31(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  329-334\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: new hosts and distri
bution of Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Servill
e (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleopterists Bulletin\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Iridomyrmex humilis; Linepithe
ma humile; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenop
sis xyloni; Dolichoderinae; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Florida; Ge
orgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; Texas; scientific; ecology; distribution; mound; 
dispersal; symbiont; myrmecophile; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  New ant hosts and distribution records from Ala
bama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas are reported for Myrmec
aphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) collected from nests of Solenopsis invicta B
uren (red imported fire ant), S. richteri Forel (black imported fire ant), S. ge
minata F. (tropical fire ant), S. xyloni McCook (southern fire ant), and Iridomy
rmex humilis (Mayr) (argentine ant). New ant host and distribution records from 
Florida and Georgia are reported for Euparia castanea Serville collected from ne
sts of S. geminata and S. xyloni. The occurrence of both species of beetle from 
the same nests of S. geminata and S. xyloni is reported for the first time. The 
range of M. excavaticollis is expanding while the range of E. castanea is decrea
sing. Both species of beetle occur in abandoned mounds of the host ants.   (This
 article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official tim
e, and is therefore in the public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed 
to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax g
enres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull.
 Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-153.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1128.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_et_al-1977(M-1128).pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cm
ave/ifahi-publications \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31586\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A., Plumley, J.K. and Lofg
ren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1972\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Results of laboratory tests with additional candid
ate bait toxicants against the imported fire ant\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  USDA, ARS, Insects Affecting Man & Animals R
esearch Lab., Gainesville, Fl.  Spec. Rep. 72-03-W, 43 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Results of laboratory tests with additional 
candidate bait toxicants against the imported fire ant\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A screening program was initiated in 1970 to ev
aluate various candidate chemicals as potential replacements for mirex in baits 
for control of the imported fire ant.   (This article was written and prepared b
y U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public d
omain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-1985.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or 2.6 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wo
jcik_et_al-1972(M-1985).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31588\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A., Plumley, J.K. and Lofg
ren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ant: Laboratory tests with addit
ional candidate bait toxicants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  J. Econ. Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  66(2)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  550\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  16 April 1973\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ant: Laboratory tests with
 additional candidate bait toxicants\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Journal of Economic Entomology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/66.2.550\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A screening program was initiated in 1970 to ev
aluate various candidate chemicals as potential replacements for mirex in baits 
for control of the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, Buren.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-0832.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publi
cations/Wojcik_et_al-1973(M-0832).pdf   or pdf available through  https://academ
ic.oup.com/jee/article/66/2/550/2211785 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31591\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Banks, W.A., Wheeler, W.B., Jouvena
z, D.P., Van Middelem, C.H. and Lofgren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1975\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after applic
ation of experimental baits for fire ant control, Southwest Georgia--1971-72\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pestic. Monit. J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  9\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  124-133; 1976. Errata 10: 31\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Mirex residues in nontarget organisms after 
application of experimental baits for fire ant control, Southwest Georgia--1971-
72\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Pesticides Monitoring Journal\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Georgia; scientific; nest; mound; chemical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  4 formulations of mirex bait were applied to ex
perimental plots.  Residues were found in crickets & other arthropods which ofte
n inhabit dead or abandoned fire ant mounds, which may contain dead ants or remn
ants of the IFA bait.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Governmen
t employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1049.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
et_al-1975(M-1049).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47417\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Brenner, R.J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bait studies on fire ants and fire ant toxicants o
n Texas cave crickets and fish-bait crickets.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 142, In: Shanklin, D. et al. (Comp.), Pro
ceedings of the 1998 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 6-8, 1998, Hot
 Springs, Arkansas, 199 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bait studies on fire ants and fire ant toxic
ants on Texas cave crickets and fish-bait crickets.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; prey; foraging; cave systems; 
chemical control; non-target species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Field studies using attractant non-toxic baits 
demonstrated that fire ants foraged intensively in and around the caves. These s
tudies also demonstrated that cave crickets emerged from the caves and foraged w
idely around the caves. The objectives were to assess susceptibity of endangered
 cave species to impact by fire ant and fire ant management practices and chemic
als. As it was not feasible or legal to test endangered cave species, cave crick
ets, a scavenger species important in the cave food chain were used as a surroga
te. The cave crickets live and reproduce in the caves and forage for food outsid
e of the caves. Cave crickets were tested in two ways. Cave crickets were fed on
 specific numbers of bait granules to determine the risk Amdro bait poses to the
 crickets. Cave crickets were fed on Amdro poisoned fire ant cadavers, to determ
ine if the movement of toxicants via scavengers into the cave systems was possib
le. Additional tests were conducted using fish-bait crickets as surrogates for c
ave crickets. Amdro granules were toxic to cave crickets and fish-bait crickets 
feeding on bait granules. Amdro poisoned fire ant cadavers did not pose a threat
 to the cave crickets. The ants could easily be controlled without affecting the
 cave crickets by restricting fire ant treatments to morning hours, thus allowin
g sufticient time for the fire ants to forage for and retrieve all of the bait p
articles before the cave crickets emerge from the caves during the night.   (Thi
s article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official ti
me, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 11.5 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/3/38/1998_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47423\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Brenner, R.J., Focks, D.A., William
s, D.F. and Allen, C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1998\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of the imported fire ant on biodiversity: S
tandarized spatial monitoring of foraging interactions.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 169-174, In: Shanklin, D. et al. (Comp.),
 Proceedings of the 1998 Imported Fire Ant Research Conference, April 6-8, 1998,
 Hot Springs, Arkansas, 199 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Impact of the imported fire ant on biodivers
ity: Standarized spatial monitoring of foraging interactions.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Dorymyrme
x bureni; Odontomachus; Paratrechina concinna; Paratrechina faisonensis; Pheidol
e dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheidole morrisi; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis in
victa; Solenopsis littoralis; Dolichoderinae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Po
nerinae; North America; USA; Florida; Texas; scientific; prey; foraging; cave sy
stems; chemical control; non-target species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  We compare two bait/monitoring approaches, used
 in combination with spatial statistical analysis, to assess relative abundance 
and foraging profiles of several species of ants, setting the stage for future c
omparisons with the introduction of interventions to mitigate fire ant populatio
ns and enhance/safeguard biodiversity of the ecosystem.   (This article was writ
ten and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefo
re in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 11.5 MB file  http://www.extension.org/media
wiki/files/3/38/1998_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31592\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Buren, W.F., Grissell, E.E. and Car
lysle, T.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ants (Solenopsis) of Florida (Hymenoptera
: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Department of Agriculture & Consumer
 Services, Division of Plant Industry, Entomology Circular No.173, 4 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Published: Nov. 1976\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  The fire ants (Solenopsis) of Florida (Hymen
optera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Solenopsis xyloni; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptrum); S
olenopsis (Euophthalma); Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Alabama; Arkansas; Flor
ida; Georgia; Louisiana; Mississippi; North Carolina; South Carolina; Texas; ext
ension; biology; morphology; taxonomy; key; ecology; distribution; impact; agric
ultural; medical; urban; chemical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A key is given to 3 subgenera of Solenopsis and
 to the 3 species of the genus that are found in Florida: S. invicta Buren, S. g
eminata (F.), and (1 record only) S. xyloni McCook. Other species found elsewher
e in the United States, S. richteri Forel and S. aurea Wheeler, are reviewed. Fu
rther distinguishing characters for identification of the Florida species are pr
esented, and characters previously used that are now invalid are enumerated. Not
es are given from the literature on the distribution, biology, economic importan
ce and control of the Florida species. As well as causing itching, pustules and 
occasionally death in man by biting, all 3 species (especially S. invicta) have 
been known to cause economic losses in the harvesting of soy beans, hay and othe
r crops and in the death of young livestock and game birds. Mirex in a bait at 0
.3% for application by aircraft at 1.25 lb bait/acre or at 0.15% for ground appl
ication at 2.5 lb bait/acre or alternatively chlordane as a drench for nursery s
tock or as dusts or granules for application on non-food areas such as lawns and
 roadsides at 1.5 lb toxicant/acre, are recommended for chemical control.   (Thi
s article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official ti
me, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1077; from ANTBIB; verified-PSW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.doacs.state.fl.us/pi/enpp/ento/entcirc/ent173.pdf   or   http
://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_et_al-1976(M
-1077).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 40592\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Burges, R.J. and Blanton, C.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1984\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Diurnal and seasonal differences in red imported f
ire ant roadside abundance\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 120-130, In: M.E. Mispagel [compiler], Pr
oceedings of the 1984 Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 27-28, 1984, Gainesvil
le, Florida, 233 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Diurnal and seasonal differences in red impo
rted fire ant roadside abundance\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1984_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Pheidole dentata; Prenolepis i
mparis; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; North A
merica; USA; Florida; scientific; season; temperature; rainfall; habitat; distri
bution; population; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  One reason RIFA populations increase so rapidly
 may be their foraging success, which includes the ability to locate potential f
ood resources, recruit foragers, and displace competitors. This study addresses 
this option by monitoring patterns of RIFA foraging at roadside baits throughout
 the day and year. Timing of foraging may determine or depend on activity patter
ns of dominate or aggressive ants or other "enemies" and temperature or rainfall
.  Sampling with honey-agar and hamburger baits was carried out at 9AM, 3PM, 9PM
, and the following 3AM on 10 dates from July 1977 to July 1978.  The greatest v
alues for RIFA foraging are usually for nighttime sampling (9PM and 3AM). The lo
west values for RIFA foraging are usually for sampling at 3PM and during the win
ter months. RIFA occurs approximately twice as often in the summer as in the win
ter. Relative to the other ant species sampled, RIFA forages: 1) more at night t
han in the daytime, 2) more in March than any other individual species. This beh
avior may give RIFA a head start on spring population buildup. Peak foraging of 
native fire ants (NFA) (s. geminata) and RIFA occurs in the warm summer months. 
Their occurrences at baits are not correlated because NFA forages most in the da
ytime and RIFA most at night. Peak foraging of Pheidole dentata Mayr and Prenole
pis imparis (Say) occurs in the fall and winter, respectively. They may be less 
likely than NFA to compete directly with RIFA for food.  No correlation could be
 found with relative humidity, rainfall, total radiation, or soil temperature.  
 (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on offici
al time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 12.3 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/a/a5/1984_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47157\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Burges, R.J. and Blanton, C.M.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1984\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  A technique for marking fire ants.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 131-132, In: M.E. Mispagel [compiler], Pr
oceedings of the 1984 Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 27-28, 1984, Gainesvil
le, Florida, 233 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  A technique for marking fire ants.  [abstrac
t]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1984_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Formicinae
; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; marking; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Markal/R ball point paint markers were used to 
mark RIFA workers. Dots of blue, red, white, yellow, orange, or green paint were
 placed on seven individual workers (one color per ant). Forty-two ants were mar
ked in each of six queen-right colonies for a total of 252 marked ants. The ants
 were grasped with forceps and the top of the gaster touched into a drop of pain
t. The marked ants were returned to the colony while the paint was still wet.  T
he colonies were checked daily for three days, then biweekly until less than one
 percent of the marked ants were recovered in two consecutive examinations. The 
marks were slowly lost over a 100 day period with one mark lasting 119 days. No 
mortality could be attributed to the paint. No attempt was made to mark newly-ec
losed workers. Large chips of paint were rarely found (three times). Marked dead
 ants were found nine percent (23 out of 252 workers) of the time. No difference
s were noted in the longevity of anyone color.   (This article was written and p
repared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the
 public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 12.3 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediaw
iki/files/a/a5/1984_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31613\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Burges, R.J., Blanton, C.M. and Foc
ks, D.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  An improved and quantified technique for marking i
ndividual fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  83(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  74-78\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 2000\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  An improved and quantified technique for mar
king individual fire ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; marking; techniques; paints; retentio
n; longevity; regression analysis; mathematical models; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Individual fire ants, Solenopsis invicta Buren 
were marked with dots of Markal brand Ball Point Paint Markers. The marked ants 
were returned to the colony while the paint was still wet. The marks were slowly
 lost over a 100-day period with one mark lasting 119 days. No mortality could b
e attributed to the paint. The proportion of ants retaining marks over time can 
be expressed as a simple exponential decay model: proportion with marks = 0.7665
 * exp (-0.0175 * time in days). The technique will be useful in assessing basic
 behavioral characteristics, such as polygyne versus monogyne interactions, nest
mate discrimination, foraging profiles, and in assessing impact of candidate bio
logical control organisms on behavior and survivorship of fire ants.   (This art
icle was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, a
nd is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 01; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  htt}{\f1\fs28\ul p://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/P
lace/66151015/publications/Wojcik_et_al-2000(M-3464).pdf   }{\f1\fs28 or   http:
//www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/fe83p74.pdf   or   https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/6
0360510/publications/Wojcik_et_al-2000(M-3464).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31593\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Habeck, D.H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Breeding period and ovario
le number in Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serv
ille (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleop. Bull.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  31(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  335-338\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  Dec. 1977\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant Myrmecophiles: Breeding period and 
ovariole number in Myrmecaphodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castane
a Serville (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Coleopterists Bulletin\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; season; mound; s
ymbiont; myrmecophile; blacklight traps; pitfall traps; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Dissection of female Myrmecaphodius excavaticol
lis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville from black light collections indic
ated that both species flew in all stages of ovarian development. Dissection of 
beetles collected from light traps, ant mounds, pitfall traps, and on top of ant
 mounds suggested that M. excavaticollis may breed continuously during the year.
 The maximum number of mature eggs found in M. excavaticollis was 26, with most 
specimens containing 12 or fewer. Dissection of E. castanea collected from ant m
ounds and light traps indicated that this species too may breed continuously thr
oughout the year. The maximum number of eggs observed in E. castanea was 18. The
re were 6 ovarioles per ovary in both species.   (This article was written and p
repared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the
 public domain.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; C
halumeau, F., 1983, Batesiana et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleopt
era: Scarabaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 5
2: 142-153.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1130.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of Wojcik, 1975, Biology of Myrmecap
hodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Sca
rabaeidae) and their relationships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae),
 Ph.D. dissert., University of Florida, 74 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
and_Habeck-1977(M-1130).pdf   or   https://www.ars.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/6036051
0/publications/Wojcik_and_Habeck-1977(M-1130).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31602\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Jouvenaz, D.P., Banks, W.A., Lofgre
n, C.S. and Pereira, A.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Brasil. 
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Resumos 11th Congresso Brasileiro de Entomol
ogia Vol. 2, p. 530.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Br
asil.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; scientific; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Mi
crosporida; Neogregarinida; nematode; parasite; predator; scavenger; Diplopoda; 
millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Diptera; Phorida
e; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thy
sanura; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2416.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31600\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Jouvenaz, D.P., Banks, W.A. and Per
eira, A.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1986\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Brasil. 
 [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  Abstr. 10th. Inter. Congr. IUSSI, p. 207.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Br
asil.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite;
 predator; virus; fungus; microsporidan; neogregarine; nematode; parasite; scave
nger; Diplopoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae;
 Staphylinidae; Diptera; Phoridae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; Solenopsi
s (Labauchena); Thysanura; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Full paper = Wojcik et al., 1987, Biological co
ntrol agents of fire ants in Brazil, p. 627-628, In Eder, J. & Rembold, H. (ed),
 Chemistry and biology of social insects. Verlag J. Peperny, M\u252?nchen.  757 
p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2172.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book Section\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31603\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Jouvenaz, D.P., Banks, W.A. and Per
eira, A.C.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Brazil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Eder, J. and Rembold, H.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Book Title:}{\f1\fs28  Chemistry and biology of social insects\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  M\u252?nchen.  757 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  Verlag J. Peperny\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  627-628\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biological control agents of fire ants in Br
azil\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; scientific; symphile; myrmecophile; pathogen; virus; fungus; Mi
crosporida; Thelohania solenopsae; Vairimorpha; Neogregarinida; Mattesia geminat
a; nematode; Mermithoidea; Tetradonematidae; parasite; predator; scavenger; Dipl
opoda; millipede; Coleoptera; Chrysomelidae; Histeridae; Scarabaeidae; Martinezi
a; Diptera; Phoridae; Hemiptera; Lygaeidae; Hymenoptera; Eucharitidae; Orasema; 
Solenopsis (Labauchena); Thysanura; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Brief accounts are given of the known pathogens
, parasites, and predators of the fire ants in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  The pathoge
ns include two microsporidians, one neogregarine, and one nematode.  Phorid flie
s, eucharaitid wasps, parasitic ants, predaceous scarab beetles, hister beetles,
 chrysomelid beetle larvae, thysanura, and millipedes have been collected from f
ire ant nests in Brazil.  Their potential for use in a biological control progra
m for fire ants in the U.S. is discussed.   (This article was written and prepar
ed by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the publ
ic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1685.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Full version of Wojcik et al. 1986, Biolo
gical control agents of fire ants in Brasil, Abstr. 10th. Inter. Congr. IUSSI, p
. 207.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
et_al-1987(M-1685).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31604\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Jouvenaz, D.P. and Lofgren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report of a parasitic fly (Diptera: Phoridae
) from a red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) alate female (Hymenoptera: F
ormicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  70(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  181-182\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  March 1987\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report of a parasitic fly (Diptera: Ph
oridae) from a red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) alate female (Hymenopt
era: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; South America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; 
Phoridae; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  A puparium of a fly (Diptera: Phoridae) was dis
sected from the gaster of an alate female of Solenopsis invicta Buren (Hymenopte
ra: Formicidae), collected from a fire ant colony in Mato Grosso, Brazil.  This 
is the first report of an internal parasite in alate females from any fire ant s
pecies.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) 
on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1608.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_et_al-1987(M-1608).pdf   or   http://journals.fcla.edu/flaen
t/article/view/58258/55937   or   https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent
.cgi?article=1035&context=entomologyother   or   https://pdfs.semanticscholar.or
g/1bba/a482eda78b67f976f05cf9074f49cc7b639d.pdf   or pdf available through  http
://journals.fcla.edu/flaent/article/view/58258 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47247\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Jouvenaz, D.P. and Patterson, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Nematode Parasites of Fire Ants from South America
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 73-81, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler & ed.
], Proceedings of the 1991 Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 19-20, 1991, Ston
e Mountain, Georgia, 118 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Nematode Parasites of Fire Ants from South A
merica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1991_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; South America; Argentina; Brazil; Uruguay; scientific; ca
ste; mound; colony; morphology; behavior; symbiont; myrmecophile; nematode; path
ogen; Mermithoidea; mermithid nematode; Tetradonematidae; Tetradonema; biocontro
l; disease transmission; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_et_al-1991(M-2482).pdf   or in this 3.7 MB file http://www.e
xtension.org/mediawiki/files/b/b1/1991_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31597\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Lofgren, C.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bibliography of imported fire ants and their contr
ol: First supplement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bull. Entomol. Soc. Am.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  28(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  269-276\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  15 September 1982\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Bibliography of imported fire ants and their
 control: First supplement\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Bulletin of the Entomological Society 
of America\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1093/besa/28.3.269\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis
 richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; South America; review; bibliography; 
chemistry; biology; taxonomy; morphology; physiology; genetics; ecology; behavio
r; symbiont; myrmecophile; pathogen; parasite; predator; impact; agricultural; m
edical; urban; chemical control; biocontrol; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red and black imported fire ants (IFA), Sol
enapsis invicta Buren and S. richteri Forel, now occupy more than 52 million ha 
in the southern United States. The literature on these controversial pests was c
ollected in a bibliography by Banks et al. in 1978 (26). Since that bibliography
 was compiled, the flow of literature on IFA has increased to such an extent tha
t a supplement is warranted.  This article was written and prepared by U.S. Gove
rnment employee(s) on official time and is therefore in the public domain.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-1349.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_and_Lofgren-1982(M-1349).pdf   or pdf file available through
  https://academic.oup.com/ae/article/28/3/269/176280 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31609\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Naves, M.A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1992\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Calyptodesmus sanctus (Diplopoda: Pyrgo
desmidae) a facultative myrmecophile introduced into the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  20(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  77-87\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Biology of Calyptodesmus sanctus (Diplopoda:
 Pyrgodesmidae) a facultative myrmecophile introduced into the United States\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Sociobiology\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Camponotus floridanus; Cyphomy
rmex rimosus; Pheidole crassicornis; Pheidole dentata; Pheidole floridana; Pheid
ole lamia; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Solenopsis geminata; Solenop
sis invicta; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; North America; USA; Florida; Georgi
a; scientific; biology; habitat; nests; distribution; interspecific interactions
; behavior; feeding; detritivores; scavenging; defensive; symbiont; myrmecophile
; Calyptodesmus sanctus; Calyptodesmus schubarti; collecting; pitfall; radioisot
ope; radioisotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; introduced species; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The introduced millipede Calyptodesmus sanctus 
Schubart was collected in active nests of Pheidole crassicornis Emery, P. dentat
a Mayr, P. floridana Emery, P. lamia Wheeler, P. metallescens Emery, P. moerens 
Wheeler, Solenopsis geminata (F.), S. invicta Buren, Cyphomyrmex rimosus (Spinol
a), Cyphomyrmex sp. and Camponotus floridanus (Buckley) as well as in abandoned 
S. geminata mounds, rotten logs, leaf litter, and pitfall traps in Florida and G
eorgia. Field and laboratory observations indicate that this millipede is a facu
ltative myrmecophile with no preference for any specific host.  Laboratory studi
es using 32Phosphorus demonstrate feeding on dead ants, indicating it is a scave
nger.  The millipedes also ate organic materials in the laboratory.  The use of 
a defensive secretion is described.  Collection data indicate that this milliped
e is relatively common in Florida and Georgia, but has a patchy distribution.   
(This article was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on officia
l time, and is therefore in the public domain.)          **[Calyptodesmus sanctu
s = Calyptodesmus schubarti.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire Ant
 Literature Database; verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  3.5 MB }{\f1\fs28\ul http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2User
Files/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_and_Naves-1992(M-2571).pdf}{\f1\fs28   
 or 3.5 MB http://afrsweb.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojc
ik_and_Naves-1992(M-2571).pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 36465\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Patterson, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Studies of bait toxicants on red imported fire ant
s and non-target ants in South Florida, 1989-1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 59-72, In: Mispagel, M.E. [compiler & ed.
], Proceedings of the 1991 Imported Fire Ant Conference, March 19-20, 1991, Ston
e Mountain, Georgia, 118 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Studies of bait toxicants on red imported fi
re ants and non-target ants in South Florida, 1989-1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1991_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Aphaenogaster ashmeadi; Aphaen
ogaster nr. rudis; Brachymyrmex obscurior; Camponotus floridanus; Cardiocondyla 
emeryi; Conomyrma bureni; Crematogaster clara; Cyphomyrmex rimosus; Formica arch
boldi; Hypoponera opaciceps; Neivamyrmex opacithorax; Odontomachus ruginodis; Pa
ratrechina bourbonica; Paratrechina faisonensis; Paratrechina longicornis; Pheid
ole dentata; Pheidole metallescens; Pheidole moerens; Pheidole morrisi; Pseudomy
rmex mexicanus; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsis invicta; Solenopsis (Diplorhoptr
um); Strumigenys louisianae; Tapinoma melanocephalum; Tetramorium caldarium; Dol
ichoderinae; Ecitoninae; Formicinae; Myrmicinae; Attini; Ponerinae; Pseudomyrmec
inae; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; chemical control; bait toxicant; 
\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  LogicR and AmdroR baits were applied as broadca
st and single-mound treatments for control of imported fire ants in Caloosa park
 in Palm Beach County, Florida. Both baits were applied as a broadcast treatment
 using a tractor-mounted applicator at the label-recommended rate of 1.7 kg bait
/ha (1 lb/acre). Both baits were also applied as a single-mound treatment by han
d by 8 workers at the label-recommended rates of 1 to 5 tablespoons of bait per 
mound (amount applied depended on mound size). All blocks were treated on 15 Feb
ruary 1989. Each block was 1.6 to 2.4-ha (4 to 6 acres) and all were bounded by 
physical barriers (canal, woods, RR right-of-way, insecticide treated ball field
s, or paved areas) which precluded immigration of fire ant colonies. An untreate
d check block was set up in Lake Ida Park, Delray Beach, ca. 2 km south of Caloo
sa Park.  RIFA were monitored by mound counts.  Non-target ants were monitored u
sing pitfall traps.  26 species of ants in 18 genera in 6 subfamilies were colle
cted in pitfall traps.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Governme
nt employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 from-SDP; from-DPW, verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2481.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Wojcik_and_Patterson-1991(M-2481).pdf   or in this 3.7 MB file http
://www.extension.org/mediawiki/files/b/b1/1991_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47272\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Patterson, R.S.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonality of RIFA mating flights\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 22-34, In: J.P. Ellis [compiler], Proceed
ings of the 1993 Imported Fire Ant Conference, June 15-18, 1993, Charleston, Sou
th Carolina, 141 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Seasonality of RIFA mating flights\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1993_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; females; males; mating; flights; sex 
ratio; season; flight trap; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3.6 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/7/74/1993_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Book\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31612\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comprehensive literature database for the imported
 fire ants, Solenopsis invicta and Solenopsis richteri\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Series Editor:}{\f1\fs28  Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Series Title:}{\f1\fs28  FORMIS: A master bibliography of ant litera
ture\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Place Published:}{\f1\fs28  Gainesville, Florida\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Publisher:}{\f1\fs28  USDA-ARS, CMAVE\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Comprehensive literature database for the im
ported fire ants, Solenopsis invicta and Solenopsis richteri\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title Prefix:}{\f1\fs28  Not new, Feb 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  Universal: ant; Formicidae; Taxonomic: Solenops
is invicta; Solenopsis richteri; etc. including all other ant genera; species; &
 subfamilies; Geographic: North America; country; state; other continents & coun
tries; Publication: scientific; popular; administrative; bibliography; review; e
xtension; General; chemistry; cuticular hydrocarbons; pheromone; trail; brood; q
ueen; colony odor; venom; biology; diet; prey; trophallaxis; food flow; oviposit
ion; mating; flight; colony founding; colony development; polymorphism; caste; c
olony; colony growth; colony size; colony migration; polygyny; time; season; tem
perature; taxonomy; key; morphology; physiology; genetics; hybrid; allozyme; chr
omosome; diploid males; ecology; distribution; population; mound; nest; interspe
cific interactions; community; dispersal; floating; behavior; aggression; foragi
ng; territory; nestmate recognition; stridulation; symbiont; myrmecophile; patho
gen; parasite; predator; tending Hemiptera; impact; agricultural; urban; medical
; economic; ecological; wildlife; control; chemical control; biocontrol; mechani
cal control; quarantine; reinfestation; methods; rearing; collecting; bait; pitf
all; Specific: (as provided by authors); \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  General Information - This database contains 24
34 citations and 1370 abstracts to articles dealing with imported fire ants.    
 [NOTE: S. saevissima is S. invicta or S. richteri in North America.]     Update
s - We plan to update the Fire Ant Literature Database every year or so. Please 
let us know if you would like an update. If you want to make sure your fire ant 
publications are included in the next update please send us copies with a note r
equesting inclusion in the database. We will also be happy to add abstracts to y
our papers if you send citations with abstracts to us on a computer disk in ASCI
I text format. If you have any problems, please call (352 374-5986) or write. We
 would also appreciate notification of any errors so the database can be correct
ed. Datafile Formats- This database can be sent in numerous formats. The Endnote
 format allows full manipulation of the literature database including- keyword s
earches, automatic construction of bibliographies, and formatting to fit journal
 styles. An EndNote\u174? Viewer can be obtained from Niles & Associates by call
ing (510) 559-8592 or from the Web at http://www.niles.com. The comma delimited 
database file should be able to be imported into most standard database programs
. The word processor file can be imported into word processors for simple keywor
d searches. Pro-Cite, Refer and other formats are available upon special request
. The searchable version is also available on the web via Florida's WEBLUIS http
://webluis.fcla.edu/cgi-bin/cgiwrap/fclwlv3/wlv3/DGref/DBFO/CM02/P1advsrch or Da
vid B. Taylor's Insect Bibliography internet site http://entobib.unl.edu\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-#.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://cmave.usda.ufl.edu/~formis/ \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Report\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 47289\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P. and Smallwood, J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1993\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ant predation on kestrels\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Institution:}{\f1\fs28  p. 120-122, In: J.P. Ellis [compiler], Proce
edings of the 1993 Imported Fire Ant Conference, June 15-18, 1993, Charleston, S
outh Carolina, 141 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Red imported fire ant predation on kestrels\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-21, Apr 10; IN: a-1993_IFA_Conference\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Florida; scientific; impact; wildlife; bird; kestrel; chem
ical control; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 10; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW, verified-DPW.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  in this 3.6 MB file http://www.extension.org/mediawi
ki/files/7/74/1993_IFA_Conference_Proceedings.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31608\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wojcik, D.P., Smittle, B.J. and Cromroy, H.L.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: Feeding relationships of M
artinezia dutertrei and Euparia castanea (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) with their a
nts hosts, Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insect. Soc.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  38(3)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  273-281\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  September 1991\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Fire ant myrmecophiles: Feeding relationship
s of Martinezia dutertrei and Euparia castanea (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) with t
heir ants hosts, Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Insectes Sociaux\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01314913\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis geminata; Solenopsi
s invicta; Solenopsis richteri; Myrmicinae; North America; USA; Florida; Mississ
ippi; scientific; biology; trophallaxis; interspecific interactions; behavior; s
trigilation; symbiont; predator; myrmecophile; predator; scavenger; Coleoptera; 
Scarabaeidae; Euparia castanea; Martinezia dutertrei; biocontrol; rearing; radio
isotope; phosphorus-32; 32P; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Feeding relationships of adult Euparia castanea
 Serville and Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau with their ant hosts were studied i
n the laboratory using the radioactive tracer 32P. Euparia castanea was tested w
ith Solenopsis geminata (F.), Martinezia dutertrei Chalumeau was tested with S. 
invicta Buren, S. richteri Forel, and S. geminata. Unlabeled beetles were expose
d to various radioisotope labeled conditions for 24 hr and then checked for acqu
ired radioactivity. In whole colony tests, both species of beetles acquired radi
oactivity. M. dutertrei obtained food from live ants, but E. castanea did not. B
oth species of beetles ate ant larvae. E. castanea also obtained food from ant l
arvae by strigilation. Neither species of beetle fed on ant feces or other secre
tions on the substrate. Both species of beetles obtained food by strigilation fr
om fresh and decomposed worker ant cadavers. M. dutertrei also ate both kinds of
 ant cadavers. Both species of beetles also ate dead house flies, indicative of 
scavenging or feeding on ant booty. M. dutertrei showed no preference for any pa
rticular ant species. Ants did not obtain food by trophallaxis or glandular secr
etion from either species of beetle.   (This article was written and prepared by
 U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public do
main.)          *[M. excavaticollis changed to Martinezia dutertrei; Chalumeau, 
F., 1983, Batesiana  et Martinezia, nouveax genres d'Eupariini (Coleoptera: Scar
abaeidae: Aphodiinae) du nouveau monde, Bull. Mensuel Soc. Linn. Lyon 52: 142-15
3.]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS; from Fire Ant Literature Database;
 verified-DPW, USDA-CMAVE M-2534.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Research Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of Wojcik, 1975, Biology of Myrmecap
hodius excavaticollis (Blanchard) and Euparia castanea Serville (Coleoptera: Sca
rabaeidae) and their relationships to Solenopsis spp. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae),
 Ph.D. dissert., University of Florida, 74 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi-publications
   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wojcik_
et_al-1991(M-2534).pdf   or   http://www.springerlink.com/content/l8134h5k237j2r
17/fulltext.pdf \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 78296\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  W\u243?jcik, \u321?., Ch\u281?\u263?, M., Skowron
ek, P., Grabowski, M., Persona, K. and Strachecka, A.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2022\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Do the different life history strategies of ants a
nd honeybees determine fat body morphology?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Arthropod Struct. Dev.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  69, 101186\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  9 p.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 2022; online 10 June 2022\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Do the different life history strategies of 
ants and honeybees determine fat body morphology?\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Arthropod Structure & Development\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asd.2022.101186\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-99, Dec 22\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Formica cinerea; Formica (Sevi
formica) cinerea; Formicinae; Europe; Poland; scientific; life history; physiolo
gy; morphology; fat body; trophocytes; oenocytes; binucleated oenocytes; heart; 
foraging; arthropods; Apis mellifera mellifera; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The separation of two sister groups such as ant
s and bees in the Cretaceous involved the development of distinctive characteris
tics to occupy separate ecological niches. From the point of view of biology and
 ecology, it is important to see how different life history strategies affect th
e physiology of these insects. The fat body is the most metabolically important 
tissue in the organism of each insect. Therefore, we conducted a comparative ana
lysis of the morphological image of the subcuticular fat body in different local
isation/segments in Formica (Seviformica) cinerea and Apis mellifera mellifera f
oragers, because of the similarity of their functions in colonies. We observed t
hat the fat bodies of ants and bees were composed of the same cell types: tropho
cytes and oenocytes. However, in each of the segments, the fat body cells in ant
s were bigger and there were fewer of them in comparison with bees. The dorsal p
art of the fat body of ants had a bilayer structure, where the outer layer was f
ormed by binucleated oenocytes. Binucleated oenocytes were also found in the inn
er layer near the heart and tracheole. In bees, the fat body was unilayered and 
the trophocytes and oenocytes were present side by side. The similarities and, i
n particular, the differences in the structure of the fat body are the adaptatio
n of these sister groups to life in a diverse environment.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 23; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  4.1 MB  https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S1
467803922000470?token=733242F72CC97ECEDDBD74C9EC1378929336ECD1BB696B5B0995343C7C
E16ED30CDC5156D3BC99CE9DF624B8AF33B7DE&originRegion=us-east-1&originCreation=202
21210032853   or html  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S146780
3922000470?via%3Dihub \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 31744\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Wuellner, C.T., Porter, S.D. and Gilbert, L.E.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Eclosion, mating, and grooming behavior of the par
asitoid fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  85(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  563-566\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 December 2002\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Eclosion, mating, and grooming behavior of t
he parasitoid fly Pseudacteon curvatus (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2002)085[0563:EMAG
BO]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; Texas; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; paras
itoid; Diptera; Phoridae; Pseudacteon curvatus; biocontrol; mass rearing; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Phorid flies from the genus Pseudacteon are par
asitoids of Solenopsis ants.  Recent efforts of controlling imported fire ants i
n the United States have focused on rearing and releasing these flies as biocont
rol agents.  We studied eclosion, mating, and grooming behavior of Pseudacteon c
urvatus in an effort to increase understanding of its biology.  The sex ratio of
 eclosing flies in the lab was 1:1. The flies emerged only in the morning and we
re protandrous.  Mating in the lab occurred on the substrate and did not require
 disturbed ants.  Males and probably also females mated multiply.   (This articl
e was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and 
is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 02; from NAL'S AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; USDA-CMAVE M-3753.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://hdl.handle.net/10113/3352   or   http://www.a
rs.usda.gov/fireant/publications/FE85_563.pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2
UserFiles/Place/66151015/publications/Wuellner_et_al-2002(M-3753).pdf   or pdf a
vailable through html  https://bioone.org/journals/florida-entomologist/volume-8
5/issue-4/0015-4040_2002_085_0563_EMAGBO_2.0.CO_2/ECLOSION-MATING-AND-GROOMING-B
EHAVIOR-OF-THE-PARASITOID-FLY-PSEUDACTEON/10.1653/0015-4040(2002)085[0563:EMAGBO
]2.0.CO;2.full \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32012\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Zacaro, A.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report on the ultrastructure (TEM) of a trul
y parasitic phorid: the ovary of the scuttle fly Pseudacteon solenopsidis Schmit
z (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Acta Microscop.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  6B\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  622-623\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  First report on the ultrastructure (TEM) of 
a truly parasitic phorid: the ovary of the scuttle fly Pseudacteon solenopsidis 
Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Acta Microscopica\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-1, Apr 07\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South 
America; Brazil; scientific; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Diptera; Phoridae
; Pseudacteon solenopsidis; biocontrol; morphology; ultrastructure; ovary; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 99; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/
publications/Zacaro_and_Porter-1997(M-3297).pdf   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/s
aa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 39185\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Zacaro, A.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1997\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Female reproductive system of the scuttle fly Pseu
dacteon wasmanni Borgmeier Diptera, Phoridae.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Braz. J. Morph. Sci.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  14(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  95-95\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Female reproductive system of the scuttle fl
y Pseudacteon wasmanni Borgmeier Diptera, Phoridae.  [abstract]\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Brazilian Journal of Morphological Sci
ences\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South 
America; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Dipte
ra; Phoridae; Pseudacteon wasmanni; ovary; ovipositor; scuttle Fly; decapitating
 fly; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32013\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Zacaro, A.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Female reproductive system of the decapitating fly
 Pseudacteon wasmanni Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Arthropod Struct. Dev.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  31(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  329-337\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  April 2003; online 15 April 2003\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Female reproductive system of the decapitati
ng fly Pseudacteon wasmanni Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Arthropod Structure & Development\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  doi:10.1016/S1467-8039(02)00049-X\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  FAL, Dec 02; PDF-1, Mar 05\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis; Myrmicinae; South 
America; Brazil; scientific; biocontrol; symbiont; myrmecophile; parasite; Dipte
ra; Phoridae; Pseudacteon wasmanni; ovary; ovipositor; scuttle Fly; decapitating
 fly; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  Pseudacteon wasmanni is a South American decapi
tating fly that parasitizes workers of Solenopsis fire ants.  We used light micr
oscopy (historesin serial-sectioning stained with Haematoxylin/Eosin) and scanni
ng electron microscopy to show and analyze internal and whole external views of 
the female reproductive system.  All specimens analyzed (n=9) by light microscop
y showed post-vitellogenic oocytes inside the ovaries.  The lack of typical foll
icles (oocyte-nurse cell complexes) in all specimens suggests that oogenesis occ
urs during the pupal stage.  The total number of eggs found ranged from 31 to 28
0 (X= 142 +- 73, SD).  The egg has a slugform or torpedo shape (about 130 by 20 
\u181?m) with a pointed apex at the posterior pole as defined by the fly; the mi
cropyle appears to be in a depression or invagination at the anterior pole.  An 
acute hypodermic-like ovipositor is evaginated from the hard sclerotized externa
l genitalia during egg laying.  The existence of a muscular bulb associated with
 the end of the common oviduct suggests that the egg is injected into the ant's 
body by a strong contraction of the bulb which probably is stimulated by bending
 of several ventral sensilla.  During contraction, the abdomen extends out along
 a large fold between the 6th and 7th tergites in such a way that the sclerotize
d genitalia is rotated ventrally into a slightly anterior orientation in prepara
tion for oviposition.   (This article was written and prepared by U.S. Governmen
t employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 03; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW, verified-DPW; CMAVE-M3803.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  3 MB http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?
id=2481&content=PDF   or 2.9 MB http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151
015/publications/Zacaro_and_Porter-2003(M-3803).pdf   or 2.9 MB   https://www.ar
s.usda.gov/arsuserfiles/60360510/publications/Zacaro_and_Porter-2003(M-3803).pdf
   or pdf available through http://hdl.handle.net/10113/2481   or pdf available 
through http://www.ars.usda.gov/saa/cmave/ifahi/sdporter \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 32121\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Zakharov, A.A. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  1996(1995)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  Spatial structure and patterns of foraging trails 
in polygyne fire ants (Formicidae: Solenopsis)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Rus. Entomol. J.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  4(1)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  3-8\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  July 1996\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  Spatial structure and patterns of foraging t
rails in polygyne fire ants (Formicidae: Solenopsis)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Russian Entomological Journal\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; North America; USA; scientific; spatial structure; foraging pattern; foraging 
trail; polygyny; foraging tunnel system; nest; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The trail vector method was used to study the s
patial structure and patterns of foraging in the polygyne form of Solenopsis inv
icta. The phenomenon of secondary division of nest foraging areas is described. 
Zones of priority use and indefinite use are separated. Priority zones can be dr
awn not only around different nests but also around what appear to be foraging t
unnel systems. The trail vector method does not damage ant nests and tunnels. It
 is possible to use it repeatedly for estimating in the same plot.   (This artic
le was written and prepared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and
 is therefore in the public domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 00; from Fire Ant Literature Databa
se; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Reference Type: }{\f1\fs28  Journal Article\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Record Number: }{\f1\fs28 38521\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Author:}{\f1\fs28  Zhang, R., Li, Y., Liu, N. and Porter, S.D.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Year:}{\f1\fs28  2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Title:}{\f1\fs28  An overview of the red imported fire ant (Hymenopt
era: Formicidae) in Mainland China\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomol.\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Volume:}{\f1\fs28  90(4)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Pages:}{\f1\fs28  723-731\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Date:}{\f1\fs28  1 Dec. 2007\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Short Title:}{\f1\fs28  An overview of the red imported fire ant (Hy
menoptera: Formicidae) in Mainland China\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Alternate Journal:}{\f1\fs28  Florida Entomologist\par }
{\f1\fs28\b DOI:}{\f1\fs28  https://doi.org/10.1653/0015-4040(2007)90[723:AOOTRI
]2.0.CO;2\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Label:}{\f1\fs28  PDF-10, Feb 08\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Keywords:}{\f1\fs28  ant; Formicidae; Solenopsis invicta; Myrmicinae
; Asia; China; scientific; distribution; impact; ecological; ecological invasion
; medical; stings; chemical control; insecticides; bait; N-butyl perfluorooctane
 sulfonamide; pest management; pest control programs; governmental programs and 
projects; pest infestation; eradication program; fire ant control; invasive spec
ies; \par }
{\f1\fs28\b Abstract:}{\f1\fs28  The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta B
uren is a serious invasive insect that is native to South America.  Its presence
 was officially announced in mainland China in Jan 2005. To date, it has been id
entified in 4 provinces in mainland China (Guangdong, Guangxi, Hunan, Fujian) in
 a total of 31 municipal districts. The total area reported to be infested by S.
 invicta in late 2006 was about 7,120 ha, mainly in Guangdong Province (6,332 ha
). Most of the reported human stings are in the heavily infested area around Wuc
huan City. The most commonly reported reactions have been abnormal redness of th
e skin, sterile pustules, hives, pain, and/or fever. It has been predicted that 
most of mainland China is viable habitat for red imported fire ants, including 2
5 of 31 provinces. The probable northern limit of expansion reaches Shandong, Ti
anjing, south Henan, and Shanxi provinces. Traditional and new insecticides incl
uding the bait N-butyl perfluorooctane sulfonamide and the contact insecticide Y
ichaoqing have been developed and used to control S. invicta. The Ministry of Ag
riculture and the Chinese government have established an 8-year eradication prog
ram (2006 to 2013) for S. invicta in China.   (This article was written and prep
ared by U.S. Government employee(s) on official time, and is therefore in the pu
blic domain.)\par }
{\f1\fs28\b Notes:}{\f1\fs28  Part of FORMIS 08; from NAL's AGRICOLA; from Fire 
Ant Literature Database; from-DPW,\par }
{\f1\fs28\b URL:}{\f1\fs28  http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/naldc/download.xhtml?id=94
99&content=PDF   or   http://www.ars.usda.gov/sp2UserFiles/Place/66151015/public
ations/Zhang_et_al-2007(M-4249).pdf   or   http://www.bioone.org/doi/pdf/10.1653
/0015-4040(2007)90%5B723:AOOTRI%5D2.0.CO%3B2   or pdf available through  http://
hdl.handle.net/10113/9499   or pdf available through  https://bioone.org/journal
s/florida-entomologist/volume-90/issue-4/0015-4040_2007_90_723_AOOTRI_2.0.CO_2/A
n-Overview-of-the-Red-Imported-Fire-Ant-Hymenoptera/10.1653/0015-4040(2007)90[72
3:AOOTRI]2.0.CO;2.full   or html http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1653/0015-404
0%282007%2990%5B723%3AAOOTRI%5D2.0.CO%3B2 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }
{\f1\fs28 \par }}